Anlage 2 zur V0356/20

Food assistance through urban food vouchers
in Republic of Congo
in the fight against COVID-19

CONTEXT

OBJECTIVE OF THE INTERVENTION

The COVID-19 pandemic is now affecting the
Republic of Congo with the first officially
declared case being confirmed mid-March. The
government is seeking to control the outbreak
by limiting transmission, and, to this end,
adopted several successive measures including:

Main objective
Improve the food security of vulnerable urban
households through unconditional cash
transfers allowing them to purchase food from
neighborhood shops.

• The closure of universities, schools and
training centers;

• A ban on gatherings of more than 50
people;

• The closure of all borders;
• The confinement of the population.

Specific objectifves

• Identify vulnerable households to assist
through cash transfers;

• Provide food assistance to 4,000 vulnerable
households (20,000 people) through cash
transfers;

• Raise awareness among these households
Confinement will have a large impact on the
population’s food security, in particular for
casual laborers and petty traders who live day to
day. Their food security will deteriorate very
quickly because of lost employment and lower
incomes, and to spiraling food prices. World
Food Program assesses the situation will be
especially difficult in urban areas because rural
areas have better coping capacities in this
scenario.
According to the 2015 comprehensive food
security and vulnerability analysis baseline,
150,000 people were moderately or severely
food insecure, especially in outlying areas of
Brazzaville and Pointe Noire. We estimate that
some 300,000 people may now be food
insecure as a result of covid-19 and
confinement. An immediate response is needed
to allow this vulnerable population to access the
food they need.
WFP is proposing a targeted food voucher
intervention in high vulnerability areas. April 2,
the Government of Congo, through the Ministry
of Social Affairs and Humanitarian Action
(MASAH), requested UN support to mitigate the
consequences. WFP will support the
Government by providing food assistance to
vulnerable populations in the outlying Djiri,
Madibou and Mfilou arrondissements of
Brazzaville.

and encourage them to adopt individual and
collective hygiene rules relating to
protection against Covid-19;

• Help maintain a certain level of income for
small traders in neighborhood shops during
this period of downturn in the crisis.

Expected results

• A database of targeted vulnerable
households in arrondissements in Djiri,
Madibou and Mfilou arrondissements is
developed;

• 4,000 vulnerable households (20,000
people) receive a mobile money cash
transfer equivalent to a 30 day ration;

• Targeted households are made aware of the
adoption of individual and collective hygiene
rules relating to protection against Covid-19;

• About twenty shops are targeted and
increase their income.

April 2020

ASSISTANCE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
The program will build on the existing national social
protection program of the Ministry of Social Affairs and
Humanitarian Action in the outlying districts of Brazzaville. A
social registry of very vulnerable households already exists.
WFP and its partner Caritas will verify that people in the
social registry meet vulnerability criteria.

Due to the current pandemic, and to reduce the risk as
much as possible, WFP will use mobile money transfers.
Relative to other options, this minimizes the need to group
beneficiaries and limits the number of contacts with field
agents. In addition, there will be no handling of bills or coins
which could be a source of contamination.
While mobile phone transfers allow people to make
purchases from shops of their choice, in this case, WFP and
Caritas, the cooperating partner, will identify around twenty
stores where beneficiaries will be encouraged to shop.
Although the mobile phone transfer system allows
beneficiaries to make purchases from merchants of their
choice, in this case, the WFP and Caritas will identify around
twenty partner shops in the two districts. These shops will
be integrated into the Airtel money system and will be fitted
with signs with the WFP logo to facilitate location by
beneficiaries.

Beneficiaries will be encouraged to visit these selected
shops, which will have the following advantages:

Coordination mechanisms
Coordination will be ensured with the Ministry of Social
Affairs and Humanitarian Action, local authorities and
neighborhood leaders. WFP is in consultation with other
actors and agencies of the United Nations system to identify
possible synergies to strengthen the social protection of
households affected by containment.
Possibilities for introducing soap to reinforce hygiene
measures are being considered. Other complementary
actions could be implemented to strengthen prevention and
protection of communities.

BUDGET WITH OPERATIONAL COSTS (1ST
PHASE, WFP FUNDED)
300,000 people have been identified as needing food
assistance, for a total budget of US$ 9.6 million.
WFP has released US$ 500,000, providing assistance for
20,000 people.

Budget structure (US $)
Amount of transfers

374,271

Operational costs

72,510

Indirect and direct support costs

53,219

Total

500,000

• Hygiene at stores: hand washing stations will be
available at each store. Shopkeepers and field monitors
will wear masks. Social distancing measures and
staggered distributions will be put in place to limit
crowding at the stores.

• Price regulation: WFP and partner staff will ensure
traders in selected shops abide by agreed-up to prices
for essential food so that people get the full value of
their mobile money transfer.

• Supply chain management: WFP will be able to ensure
these shops remain well stocked by coordinating their
resupply from wholesalers during confinement.

Support and communication actions
Awareness-raising and support actions will focus on two
themes:

• Awareness-raising on the prevention of Covid-19.
Prevention awareness will be aligned with the
instructions of the national plan drawn up.

• Awareness of beneficiaries on the program and
targeting criteria.
The communication component will be provided by the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Ministry of Health
communication focal points.

WFP ASSISTANCE PLAN
WFP's strategy is structured around three phases,
depending on the evolution of the situation and the
availability of resources:

• An immediate emergency response phase of one
month consisting of immediate food assistance in two
districts of Brazzaville in order to improve the food
security of vulnerable households in the context of
confinement of the population (object of this
intervention).

• A short-term response phase aimed at supporting the
fragile groups of pregnant and lactating women and
children through the implementation of nutrition
activities.

• A recovery phase involving support for economic
recovery and resilience through income-generating
activities.

April 2020 | Food assistance by cash transfers to vulnerable households

Key elements of the immediate response strategy
1. Type of intervention: unconditional cash transfer.

2. Amount of the transfer: 15 dollars per person per
month, or approximately 43,000 CFA francs per
household (assumption of 5 people per household) for
one month. This amount corresponds to around 75% of
the value of the traditional WFP basket, since the
beneficiaries are not in a situation where they have lost
all their means and reserves.

3. Geographic coverage: Djiri, Madibou and Mfilou
districts in Brazzaville at first, extension to other areas
including Pointe Noire, resource permitting.

4. Beneficiaries: Poor and vulnerable households.

5. Targeting criteria: Geographic targeting based on the
results of the vulnerability studies and using of the Social
Register (RSU) as a gateway for targeting the most
vulnerable households. WFP and its partner will conduct
a verification of the list. The advantage of using the RSU
list is that a cumbersome identification and registration
process is not necessary. Beneficiaries will be registered
at home, in compliance with all the health directives in
force in collaboration with local authorities and the
Ministry’s Social Action Districts. Beneficiary cards will be
distributed as the beneficiaries are identified.

6. Transfer mechanism: Transfer by mobile phone
(Mobile money): in urban centers, the conditions for
transfer by mobile money are met. In this context,
transfer by telephone will be preferred in order to avoid
crowds of beneficiaries. Beneficiaries will receive SIM
cards with an open account and will receive their
transfer directly. WFP agents will have direct access to
Airtel's platform to manage distributions.

7. Estimated number of beneficiaries: 20,000
(approximately 4,000 households with the assumption
of an average of 5 people per household) at first.
Extension to 300,000 beneficiaries, resource permitting.

8. Estimated budget: US $ 500,000 for the first
distribution from the WFP Immediate Response account.
Overall needs for 300,000 beneficiaries stand at $9.3m.

9. Financial partners: World Food Program.

10. Implementing partners: MASAH, CARITAS, local
authorities, mobile operators (Airtel), Shopkeepers.

Response plan developed in support of the government of the Republic of Congo

April 2020 | Food assistance by cash transfers to vulnerable households

