Hausmitteilung

Dresden.
J^LGZqGU'

□ vertraulich

Landeshauptstadt Dresden
Der Oberbürgermeister

An alle

GZ:

(OB) 15.2

Datum:

2 0. AUG. 2020

Fraktionen sowie Mitglieder
des Stadtrates der Landeshauptstadt Dresden

Beschlusskontroiie zu V0356/20 (Sitzungsnummer: SR/011/2020)
Hilfe für die Partnerstadt Brazzaville während der Covid-19-Pandemie

Sehr geehrte Fraktionen und Mitglieder des Stadtrates,

folgende abschließende Information kann zu oben genanntem Beschluss gegeben werden:
1) „Der Oberbürgermeister wird beauftragt, die bedürftige Bevölkerung in der Partnerstadt
Brazzaville mit einem Betrag von 50.000 Euro für die Beschaffung von Lebensmitteln und

Seife zu unterstützen. Dies geschieht in Zusammenarbeit mit dem „Welternährungspro
gramm" und der Initiative „ShareTheMeal"."

Die Unterstützung der bedürftigen Bevölkerung in der Partnerstadt Brazzaville mit einem Betrag
von 50.000 Euro für die Beschaffung von Lebensmitteln und Seife wurde mit der Anordnung zur
Überweisung der Summe am 13. Juli 2020 veranlasse
2a) „Der Oberbürgermeister wird beauftragt, in einem sogenannten „Pledge Letter" (Anlage 1
zur Beschlussausfertigung) mit dem Welternährungsprogramm (WFP) und dessen Initia
tive „ShareTheMeal" diese Unterstützung festzuschreiben. Darüber hinaus wird er beauf
tragt, die Einrichtung eines Spendenkontos der Initiative „ShareTheMeal" mit der WFP zu
vereinbaren, um für die Dresdner Bevölkerung die Gelegenheit zu geben, bürgerschaftli
ches Engagement zu entwickeln und ihrerseits konkret für die bedürftigen Bürgerinnen
und Bürger in der Partnerstadt Brazzaville in der Corona-Krise zu spenden."

Die Vereinbarung zur Unterstützung der Landeshauptstadt wurde letztendlich nicht in Form ei
nes „Pledge Letters", sondern in Form eines Vertrages mit dem Welternährungsprogramm ge
schlossen. Dies geschah auf Wunsch der Rechtsabteilung des Welternährungsprogramms. Der
Vertragstext ist der Anlage zu entnehmen. Der Vertrag wurde am 29. Juni 2020 unterschrieben.
Nach beidseitiger Unterzeichnung wurde die Einrichtung eines Spendenkontos veranlasst, um
der Dresdner Bevölkerung die Gelegenheit zu geben, selbst zu spenden. Die Spendenkampagne
dazu startete am 16. Juli 2020 und soll noch bis Ende des Sommers laufen.

-2-

2b) „Die Anlage 1 zur Vorlage „Vertrag mit ShareTheMeal — Welternährungsprogramm zur Un
terstützung In Brazzaville" wird durch die Anlage 1 zur Beschlussausfertigung, das Muster
eines „Pledge Letters" an das Welternährungsprogramm inkl. Übersetzung, ersetzt."

Wie unter 2a)erläutert, kam es letztendlich doch zu einem Vertrag zwischen der Landeshaupt
stadt Dresden und dem Welternährungsprogramm.

3) „Der Stadtrat beschließt, dass die Landeshauptstadt Dresden ihrer Partnerstadt diverse

Sachspenden zur Verfügung stellt. Dafür ist ein Budget von maximal 30.000 Euro vorgese
hen. Die Transportkosten sollen möglichst über das Bundesministerium für wirtschaftliche
Zusammenarbeit und Entwicklung finanziert werden."

Die Sachmittelspende konnte in Absprache mit dem Universitätsklinikum in Brazzaville und der

Expertise des Städtischen Klinikums Dresden zusammengestellt werden. Sie besteht aus 2.000
Einwegblusen, 9.000 Untersuchungshandschuhen, 2.000 chirurgischen Masken, 3.000 N95-Masken,40 Atembeutelschlauchsystemen, 500 antibakteriellen Filtern für Beatmungsgeräte, 1.000
Bettlaken und 100 Vliesanzügen sowie 500 Gesichtsvisieren. Die Sachmittelspende hat einen Ge
samtwert von 32.000 Euro, wobei 2.000 Euro durch eine Spende von Gesichtsvisieren und Vlies

anzügen durch die Forschungsallianz DRESDEN-concept e. V. ermöglicht wurden.

Für die vollumfängliche Übernahme der Transportkosten in Flöhe von 7.300 Euro brutto konnte
die Landeshauptstadt Fördermittel des Bundes über die SKEW {Servicestelle Kommunen in der
Einen Welt), eine Organisation des Bundesministeriums für wirtschaftliche Zusammenarbeit und
Entwicklung, einwerben. Die Sachmittelspende wurde am 11. August 2020 nach Brazzaville ver
schickt.

4) „Die Hilfe an die Partnerstadt Brazzaville während der Covid-19-Pandemie wird als Aus
nahme von der mit Datum 21. April 2020 erlassenen Haushaltssperre bestätigt. Die Mittel
sind freizugeben."

Die Mittel wurden freigegeben.
MitfnetJndlicnen Grüßen

Dirk Hilbert

Anlage

WFP

DIRECTED MULTILATERAL CONTRIBUTION AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

CITY OF DRESDEN,GERMANY
AND

WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME

FÜR THE REPUBLIC OF CONGO COUNTRY STRATEGIC PLAN (20192023)

This Agreement(the ''Agreement'''') is entered into by and between:
(a)

CITY OF DRESDEN,GERMANY (the "Donof\ and

(b)

WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME,an autonomous Joint subsidiary programme of the
United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with
headquarters in Rome, Italy, acting through its country office in Republic of Congo
{"wrr),

each a "Party" and, collectively. the "Parties".

PREAMBLE:

WHEREAS,WFP,as the United Nations' frontline agency in the fight against global hunger, is
mandated to provide emergency and development assistance to eradicate hunger and poverty
amongst the poorest and most food-insecure countries and populations;
WHEREAS,the Donor maintains a town partnership with Brazzaviiie and wishes to support the
local Population during the COVlD-19 pandemic.

WHEREAS,the Donor wishes to provide a financial contribution to WFP (the "Contrihution")
in the form of a Directed Multilateral Contribution (within the meaning of the WFP Financial

Regulations) to support the implementation of WFP Republic of Congo Country Strategie Plan
(2019-2023), under Strategie Outcome l: Food insecure people affected by shocks have access to

adequate food all year. This contribution will support the urban cash transfer programme in
Peripherie arrondissements of Brazzaviiie in the fight against COVlD-19 and negative socioeconomic impacts engendered, as more fully described in the plan attached hereto as Annex I
(the "Platt'')]-,

WHEREAS,WFP is Willing to aeeept the Contribution subjeet to the terms and conditions of
this Agreement;

NOW,THEREFORE,the Parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

TERMS OF THE CONTRIBUTION

1.1

The Donor shall, in accordance with the schedule of payments set forth below, make the
Contribution to WFP: in support ofthe Republic ofCongo Country Strategie Plan(2019-2023)
in the total amount offifty thousand Euro, in one Single installment.
Schedule of Payments: Immediately upon entry into force of the agreement
Installment: one

Amount: 50,000 EUR

1.2

1.3

The Contribution shall be deposited into the following bank account:
Account Name:

WFP London Donation Acc. USD

Bank Name:

Citibank NA.

Bank Address:

Canada Square. Canaty Wharf. London EI4 5LB, UK

Account Number:

13321541

Swift Code:

CIT1GB2L

1BAN:

GB74C1TI18500813321541

Upon disbursement of the Contribution, the Donor shall notify WFP ofsuch disbursement
by means of a written notice to the Chief, Contribution Accounting and Donor Financial
Reporting (FINC), together with the appropriate remittance to WFP of all disbursement
infonnation.

1.4

Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the Contribution shall be made in Euro ("EUR").

1.5

The Contribution shall be made on a grant basis and shall meet the principle of Full-Cost
Recovery within the meaning of and in accordance with WFP Regulations and Rules.
For the purposes of this Agreement,"WFP Regulations and Ruies" shall mean WFP's
General Regulations and General Rules, Financial Regulations and Financial Rules,

internal policies, circulars, directives, manuals, procedures, internal practices and legal
framework, as applicable. To ensure Full-Cost Recovery, WFP shall retain, as Indirect
Support Costs, a percentage of the Transfer Costs, Implementation Costs and Direct
Support Costs associated with the activities financed by the Contribution hereunder, as
determined by WFP's Executive Board from time to time (as each ofthe temis "Indirect
Support Costs,""Transfer Costs,""Implementation Costs" and "Direct Support Costs" is
defined in the Financial Regulations).

ARTICLE II

MANAGEMENT OF THE CONTRIBUTION

2.1

WFP shall receive, administer and account for the Contribution made by the Donor
hereunder in accordance with WFP Regulations and Rules and the terms and conditions of
ihis Agreement.

2.2

For WFP accounting purposes, the amount in füll of the Contribution shall be recorded by
WFP immediately upon the effectiveness of this Agreement. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, WFP shall only be required to enter into a binding fmancial Obligation in respect
of the operations to be financed with the Contribution made hereunder upon receipt of the
Contribution.

2.3

The Contribution shall be recorded by WFP. for accounting purposes, in the equivalent
United States Dollar (USD) value at the prevailing United Nations operational rate of
exchange applicable on the date of receipt by WFP of the Contribution.

2.4

Any identifiable interest accrued on the Contribution and any residual income derived from
WFP's activities financed by the Contribution shall be utilized by WFP in accordance with
WFP Regulations and Rules.

2.5

To enable time and cost savings, the Contribution, or any portion thereof, may be used. at
WFP's discretion, for advance financing in accordance with WFP Regulations and Rules.

2.6

Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, upon temiination or expiration of this Agreement.
WFP shall re-allocate any unexpended funds, received hereunder and remaining after the
satisfaction of all commitments and liabilities incurred with funds from the Contribution,

to the subsequent phase(s) of any given Operation or to any follow-on Operation, provided
(hat in the event that there is no follow-on Operation any such remaining funds shall be
allocated and utilized in accordance with WFP Regulations and Rules.

ARTICLE III

ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING

3.1

WFP shall maintain appropriate accounting and fmancial records in respect of the receipt,
use and management of the Contribution made by the Donor hereunder.

3.2

WFP shall provide the Donor with an Annual Country Report in respect of WFP's activities
in connection with the Operation financed with the Contribution hereunder. In addition.
the Annual Performance Report, submitted by the Executive Director of WFP to the

Executive Board of WFP on an annual basis, shail be made public on WFP's offlcial
Website.

ARTICLE IV
AÜDIT

4.1

The Contribution made by the Donor shall be subject exciusively to the intemal and
external audit procedures estabiished pursuant to WFP Reguiations and Rules.

4.2

The annual financial Statements of WFP, together with the report of WFP's External
Auditor, shall be made public on WFP's official Website.

4.3

WFP's internal audit reports shall be made public on WFP's official Website in accordance

with WFP's "Policy for Disciosure of Oversight Reports," as may be amended from tirne
to time.

ARTICLE V

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

All WFP activities are monitored and evaluated in accordance with WFP Reguiations and
Rules. With respect to all matters regarding the monitoring and evaluation of WFP's
activities conducted with funds received hereunder. the Donor shall rely on WFP's
reporting. monitoring and evaluation Systems, as estabiished pursuant to WFP Reguiations
and Rules.

ARTICLE VI

PROCUREMENT; OWNERSHIP

6.1

WFP shall conducl all procurement of commodities, goods and Services fmanced from
the Contribution made pursuant to this Agreement in accordance with WFP Reguiations
and Rules.

6.2

Matters relating to the ownership by WFP ofcommodities, goods and Services procured
with funds from the Contribution shall be determined in accordance with WFP

Reguiations and Rules.

ARTICLE VII

ANTI-FRAUD AND ANTI-CORRUPTION PROVISIONS

Each Party hereby affirms that it has a zero tolerance approach to fraud and recognizes the
importance of taking all necessary precaulions to avoid corrupt, frauduient er collusive
practices. To this end. WFP shall maintain Standards of conduct goveming the Performance
of its officers, employees. agents, contractors and sub-contractors, including the prohibition
of corrupt, frauduient or collusive practices in connection vvith the granting and
administration of any resources provided pursuant to this Agreement, as set forth in WFP
Regulations and Rules, including. without limitation, WFP's Anti-Fraud and AntiCorruption Policy, as may be amended from time to time.

ARTICLE VIII

PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES

Nothing in this Agreement or any agreement and/or document entered into in connection
with this Agreement shall imply a waiver. express or implied, by WFP,the United Nations
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations of any Privileges or
immunities enjoyed by them pursuant to the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations, the 1947 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of

the Specialized Agencies, customary international law, other relevant international or
national agreements, or under domestic law.

ARTICLE IX

TERMINATION OF THE AGREEMENT

9.1

This Agreement may be terminated by (i) either Party upon provision to the other Party of
ninety (90) days' prior written notice; or (ii) mutual agreement of the Parties.

9.2

In the event of the termination of this Agreement for any reason, both Parties shall use

reasonable efforts and good faith to bring their cooperation herein to a prompt and orderly
conclusion.

9.3

The obligations of the Parties hereunder shall survive the termination or expiration of this
Agreement to the extent necessary to ensure the orderly conclusion of activities and the
settlement of all outstanding issues. accounts, Claims, disputes and liabilities hereunder.
To this end, and notwithstanding any termination or expiration of this Agreement, WFP
shall continue to hold any unexpended funds received hereunder until all commitments and

liabilities incurred with funds received hereunder have been satisfied and the activities

hereunder have been brought to an orderly conclusion.

ARTICLE X

AMENDMENT OF THE AGREEMENT

This Agreement may be supplemented or otherwise amended by a formal written
agreement signed by duly authorized representatives of each Party.

ARTICLE XI

ENTRY INTO FORCE

This Agreement shali become effective on the date on which the last of the Parties signs
this Agreement.

ARTICLE XII

APPLICABLE LAW AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES

12.1

The interpretation, construction and Performance of this Agreement including any
agreements and/or documents entered into in connection with this Agreement, and any
Claims, controversies or disputes arising hereunder or thereunder shall be exciusively
governed by general principles of international commercial law and the terms and

conditions of this Agreement, to the exciusion of any choice of law rules which would
defer the Agreement, and any agreements and/or documents entered into in connection
therewith, to the laws of any given jurisdiction.

12.2

The Parties shall use their best efforts to amicably settle any dispute, controversy, or
Claim arising out ofthe Agreement or the breach, termination or invalidity thereof.
Where the Parties wish to seek an amicable settlement through conciliation, the
conciliation shall take place in accordance with the Conciliation Rules then obtaining of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ("UNCITRAL"),or
according to such other procedure as may be agreed between the Parties in writing.

12.3

Any Claims, controversies or disputes between the Parties arising under this Agreement,
or under any other agreements and/or documents entered into in connection with this
Agreement that cannot be settied amicably under Article 12.2, above, shall be settied by

arbitration in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, then in force. The
Parties hereby designate the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at

The Hague as appointing authority in respect of any arbitral proceeding arising
hereunder. Any arbitral proceeding arising hereunder shali be conducled by an arbitral
tribunal comprising three (3) arbitrators and the language to be used in the arbitral
proceeding shall be English. The arbitral tribunal shall have no authority to award
punitive damages. The Parties shall be bound by any arbitration award rendered as a
result of such arbitration as the final adjudication of any such claiin, controversy or
dispute.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly appointed representatives of the Parties,
have on behalf of the Parties signed this Agreement as confinnation of the terms and conditions
contained herein.

For: The Donor

For: World Food Programme

Name:....Air.k liil.bM.i.

Name:..Maria..DDJD.res..Castro Benitez

Title:

Title: ....R.e.gj.Q.n9Lc(ire.c.tQr..RBJ

Date: ...19JUNI 2020,.,

^

ANNEX 1
PLAN

The COVlD-19 pandemic is now affecting the Republic of Congo with the first officially
declared case being confirmed mid-March. WFP estimates that some 300,000 people may be
food insecure as a result of COVID-19 and confinement.

The most deprived households in urban areas experience the loss of their daily income and the
price increase of basic food products. The effects of supply chain disruption are reflected in the
markets. The availability of commodities, both imported and local, and portions are declining,
while the price of products is increasing week by week. WFP monitors weekly the basic food
basket for a Congolese household in Brazzaville. its price has increased by +15% in three weeks.

An immediate response is needed to ailow this vuinerabie population to access the food they
need. in support of the govemment, WFP is implementing a targeted food voucher intervention
in high vulnerabiiity areas. The intervention targets Djiri, Madibou and Mfilou districts in
Brazzaville at first.

Under this immediate response strategy, 15 dollars per person per month, or approximately
43,000 CFA francs per household (assumption of 5 people per household) will be distributed for
one month, through mobile money. Beneficiaries go to shops identified by WFP to meet their
food needs, with due respect for health and social distancing measures.

WFP initially assists an estimated 34,000 beneficiaries (approximately 6.800 households with the
assumption of an average of 5 people per household). Resource permitting, the intervention will
be extended to 300,000 beneficiaries.

The Contribution by the City of Dresden will support this Intervention in the partner city of Brazzaville in
line with the budget(ANNEX 2). The implementation period for this Contribution will be from the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazzaville to December 31. 2020. In accordance with WFP's rules and
regulations, this Contribution will be made visible through signs in the partner shops and on the WFP
Republic of Congo social media Channels.

10

X

n [U O
21 Q
z
< ca

!

Iii]
J

!i

ü i;
ä:vi

.}
II

C^

u'

\*

{l

Hj

i
Hl

i !
Ml

!

iJ '''H

[^V=S3

UiÜll!
Hl

