Unofficial translation
To the Mayor of Dresden
Mr. Hilbert D.
Dear Mr. Mayor Hilbert!
On behalf of Alexander Beglov, Governor of St Petersburg, and Alexander
Belskiy, Chairman of St Petersburg Legislative Assembly, in connection with your
request we state with all responsibility that we understand your concern over the
current geopolitical situation.
It is obvious that nowadays the development of any city is impossible without
stable peace and equitable world order, when the security of some does not violate the
security of others, when extremist and Nazi manifestations in any country are
immediately and decisively countered.
I think it is hard to deny that over the past few years Russia has undertaken
repeated diplomatic efforts to persuade its partners to implement the Package
of measures for the Implementation of the Minsk Agreements of 2015 adopted by the
UN Security Council Resolution 2202.
Germany and France were periodically reaffirming the need to implement these
agreements but they have failed to persuade Kiev authorities to meet their
commitments.
Ukraine, which felt tacit support from its Western partners, kept ignoring and
violating the rights of its population on the territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People's Republics. Residents of these regions were subjected to discrimination,
shelling and firing, not to mention the disastrous impact on local life support systems
caused by the actions of Ukrainian Armed Forces, including damaged infrastructure
and destroyed housing and social facilities.
Over these years Russia has hosted tens of thousands of refugees from these
regions who were trying to escape from heavy shelling by the Ukrainian army.
Unfortunately, in spite of a large number of civilian casualties in the Donetsk
and Luhansk People's Republics, over these years the leaders of foreign countries and
cities have not condemned the aggressive and discriminatory practices by the
Ukrainian authorities against their own population deprived of any financing by its own
state. The authorized European and international institutions have not taken any
measures to resolve the conflict.
Today we see the ongoing practice of silencing and misrepresenting facts,
unwillingness to listen to other opinions and assessments of recent developments, also
by introducing restrictions on the media.
Moreover, supplies of arms to the conflict zone are continued which hinders the
resolution of the conflict and achieving peace.
We are convinced that you, as the head of the city responsible for life and wellbeing of your citizens, are able to be more profound than others in assessing the

situation for the people of Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine who had to appeal
to Russia for help as they hadn’t seen either attention to their needs and interests or
basic respect for their right to life and peace in their homes on behalf of the Ukrainian
authorities.
The position of the Russian Federation and the reasons why our country was
forced to launch a military special operation were exhaustively outlined by our
President Vladimir Putin.
Citizens of St Petersburg support their President.
Ukraine's eight-year military aggression against the people of the Donetsk and
Luhansk People's Republics and the genocide of Russians had to be stopped.
Russia did not start the war in Donbas. It is putting an end to it. It is protecting
its security and preventing a global catastrophe. We count on your balanced and
objective assessment of the current situation and the reasons that led to it.
I appeal to you, Mr Mayor, to make every effort to ensure that the opinions and
arguments of all parties are heard in Europe.
I believe that this is a real opportunity for St Petersburg partner cities to
contribute to facilitating a comprehensive and objective assessment of the situation by
European leaders, for them to make balanced decisions for a speedy peaceful
settlement.
Partnership relations between our cities have played a special role for many
decades. Nowadays cooperation takes place in a wide range of areas. Dresden was
among the first cities with which Leningrad established partnership relations back
in the 50s. Already in the first post-war years began to be restored the residential
quarters and some of the sights of historical value, which were damaged during
a massive bombing by the Anglo-American aircraft in February 1945, where tens of
thousands of civilians were killed. Invaluable works of art were returned to Germany
and to the state collections in Dresden, accelerating the reconstruction of German
museums destroyed by the war and the rebirth of the museum landscape of the German
Democratic Republic. All this was an important step toward historical reconciliation
between the Russian and German peoples.
We are always open for our friends. We are ready for a dialogue with partners
on mutually acceptable terms. I am convinced that only the efforts of all the parties will
lead to a speedy resolution of this tragic situation.

Chairman of
the Committee for External Relations
of St Petersburg

Evgeny Grigoriev

