Aktuelles aus dem WHO-Projekt
15.1.2024

- Gespräche mit Krankenkassen

Gspräche mit der AOK PLUS, der DAK, der Techniker, der Barmer und der IKK plus zur Ausweitung
bzw. Neuaufnahme der Kooperation. Nächster Termin auf Arbeitsebehe: 1.2.2024, DAK.

- „Bewegung Im Stadtteil": Pausiert wegen „Stadtgesundheitsprofil". Wird demnächst wieder
aufgenommen: Broschüre Löbtau, nächste Planungen: Gruna, Johannstadt, Broschüre mit
arbeitslosen Personen. Neuer Schwerpunkt: Inklusion (Kontakt zu Prof. für Soziale Arbeit an der SRH
Berlin und zu Neustad(T)Raum. Im Herbst: neue Multiplikatorenschulung, gefördert über
Förderrichtlinie „Gesundheit und Versorgung" des Landes.

- „StadtRaumMonitor-Wie lebenswert ist meine Umgebung?"-Schulung im Herbst 2023 mit der
Sächsischen Landesvereinigung für Gesundheitsförderung und der Bundeszentrale für

gesundheitliche Aufklärung für unterschiedliche Ämter der Stadtverwaltung
(https://stadtraummonitor.bzga.de)

- „Fit im Park"
"Fit im Park" findet dieses Jahr vom 21. Mal bis 12. Juli 2024 an mehreren Standorten in Dresden
statt. Der neue Veranstalter und Koordinator, Rehasportverein Deuben e.V. erarbeitet derzeit den

Kursplan mit vielfältigen Bewegungsangeboten.

Die "Kick-ofF'-Veranstaltung zu Fit im Park ist am 21. Mai 2024 im Sportpark Ostra,(Zelt noch offen)

-„Senior-fit"

"Senior fit" Zeitraum 02.April bis 23.Mai 2024 Standorte Stadtblickpark Gorbitz und
Rothermundtpark, Veranstalter und Koordinator Rehasportverein Deuben e.V

-„Fest der Begegnung"

"Fest der Begegnung",am 04.Juni 2024 im Sportpark Ostra. Es steht im Zeichen der Förderung des
Inklusionsgedankens- gemeinsam bei Sport und Spiel. Hauptverantwortllch StadtSportbund Dresden
e.V., die Gesundheitsförderung unterstützt den Tag mit.

- Projektanträge:„NewMed"-„Neue Wege der Weiterleitung in medizinische Versorgung"Förderbescheid für Vollantragsphase vom 17.11.2023- Förderung 1.12.2023-28.5.2024
* 75.000 € für Kooperationspartner ZEGV

* weitere Kooperationspartner: Stadt Chemnitz, Stadt Leipzig

Towards Thriving Societies: Advancing Health in the Well-being Economy - Political
Statement of the WHO European Healthy Cities Network for Collaborative Action
We,the mayors and senior political representatives of cities, gathered on 21-23 November 2023,
confirm our commitment to the values and principles ofthe Healthy Cities movement.

In recent years, the world has experienced a confluence of crises that pose a significant threat to
the progress made in public health. This threat is compounded by the intricate interaction ofsocial,
environmental, economic and commercial determinants of health, in which the actions and

omissions of commercial actors positively and negatively influence the conditions shaping

people's lives - how they are bom, grow, work, live and age.* These crises span various sectors,
including public health, economics and the environment, and are exemplified by events such as
climate change, the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing conflicts globally. These crises have not
only put the health gains made over previous decades at risk but have also negatively affected the
personal and societal well-being of communities and especially affect young adults and children.

The adverse effects have been feit across communities in the WHO European Region, intensifying
existing health inequities, which have been fiirther exacerbated by pöverty, migration and social
inequalities such as income disparity, various forms of disctoination atäd inadequate housing.^
These multifaceted inequalities persistently afflict comrinmities and maintain part of the

population in vulnerable situations. They create barriers in accessiiig health care and essential
resources and pose significant challenges to the physical and mental health of the general
population and the resilience of health Systems. To address these challenges, a paradigm shift is
urgently needed in how we think about the relationship between health and the economy. This
shift in thinking is embodied by the well-being economy approach, which emphasizes the
importance of public and private responsibility for population health, and by public investment,
early intervention approaches.and allöcating resources to improving population and societal wellbeing while also focusing on the environment and health in a sustainable way.
Well-being economies not only respond to crises; the approach picks up and amplifies the already
growing movements of circular economies, Community wealth building, social sustainability and
beyond GDP - many of which have been driven by local authorities and actors. Added to this is
the increased call from the general public to live in places that are safe and vibrant and where

people can thrive and not merely survive. These changes have created new opportunities for the
health and development sectors to work together to improve people's lives and societies today and
for the Coming generations.

'Commercial determinants of health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023(https://www.who.int/newsroom/fact-sheets/detail/commercial-determinants-of-health, accessed 13 November 2023).

^ Transforming the health and social equity landscape: promoting sociallyjust and inclusive growth to improve
resilience, solidarity and peace. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2023
(https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/370945, accessed 13 November 2023).

Widening inequities, declining trust- they are inextricably linked, with significant impacts on health, finds
new WHO/Europe report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023

(https://www.who.int'europe/news/item/I2-07-2023-widening-inequities~declining-trust—they-areinextricably-linked~with-significant-impacts-on-heaIth~finds-new-who-europe-report, accessed 13 November
2023).

The pursuit of healthier societies and weli-being economies is an interconnected agenda that has
gained traction among govemments and international institutions throughout the WHO European
Region. This movement builds on progress to date, including the Pan-European Commission on
Health and Sustainable Development, the Geneva Charter for Well-being and the Integration of
health considerations within economic and business frameworks. It specifically takes forward
WHO Regional Committee for Europe resolution EUR/RC69/R5: Accelerating progress towards
healthy, prosperous lives for all, increasing equity in health and leaving no one behind in the WHO
European Region,specifically around bringingthe social values ofsolidarity, equity, socialjustice,
inclusion and gender equality into mainstream fiscal and growth policies and the outcome of the
WHO European Regional High-level Forum on Health in the Well-being Economy.^ At the heart
of this approach lies the recognition that health both drives and co-creates well-being economies
based on the complex interaction between individual and Community health, early interventions,
economic prosperity and social and environmental factors. Healthy populations, health-care
Services and health equity deliver more prosperous and resilient societies and economies, and the
health sector can also maximize these economic and social benefits. Health will also benefit from

well-being economies through improved conditions for everyone to be well.

A well-being economy has a policy orientation and governance approach that aims to put people
and their well-being at the centre of policy and decision-making.'^ Well-being economies shift and
maximize the benefits of all Investment for equitable well-being across human, social, economic
and planetary well-being (Fig. 1).^^ This includes using a wide ränge of levers, such as innovative
fiscal instruments, procurement, employment, regulation and impact assessment of policies to
deliver well-being while maximizing the co-benefits across these domains.

Fig. I. Planetary, human, economic and social well-being capital

^ Shifting together to well-being economies: investing in healthy, fairer, prosperous societies today: outcome
Statement ofthe WHO European Regional High-level Forum on Health in the Well-being Economy, 1-2
March 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2023
(https://ins.who.int/handle/10665/373781, accessed 13 November 2023).
European Commission. Council conclusions on the economy of wellbeing. Official J Eur Union. 2019;C
400/9 (https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/

PDF/?uri=CELEX:52019XG1126(06)&rid=5#:~:text=While%20people's%20wellbeing%20is%20a,fiscal%20
sustainability%20and%20societal%20stability, accessed 13 November 2023).

^ Health in the weli-being economy: background paper: working together to achieve healthy, fairer, prosperous
societies across the WHO European Region. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023
(https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/366228, accessed 13 November 2023).

^ Shifting together to well-being economies: investing in healthy, fairer, prosperous societies today: outcome
Statement ofthe WHO European Regional High-level Forum on Health in the Well-being Economy, 1-2
March 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2023
(https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/373781, accessed 13 November 2023).

6eed*eeeterqeiÄy

KedthyH» eip*cun<r

IMHirBuHtiinabl»

Mentd hMlUi•wcMHtog

MagcMkoMM

MAy to canvoul daif

SwMMbt»pobir OMspart

aclMbctfrcelroM Hms

■ ectieip trwil

Uniocful Hcabh Covenge

Aae»tosA grwiip*e

QtuitvS nonAolnAMtonr
SUMecftiut»

hcdihfe »odtlote

HodhMnftyA nMunlupU

UnhrerMi pobia forboosbif,
ioodXuel tecortty

OkwI*econoeA•

glMlUntllWlUH

Corty cMdhoeddewtogBWnt

tMong iNtnlng a Kmcy
SA.onJertya r«gubc
■igntfon

POUCY&GOVERNA
Living In Mfetya
fiee honi vioiefttt

Senteofbflonging
{-MiiteringT

living wage

Södel cohcslon

UnAeml «odal piotmkin
ttunughUielHr-couci«

a erebrKing (SvofsKy
Pwcdved aMRy to hlhNnc»

Dcunt.psvthok«ici0y

pofitia a deddanifAgene^

MPewotk

Södel «ipport a pretccdon

CendM-ietpcmh«
emploY'nMt

BuMng tru tt in othen
a In ImtKutiORt

Södel diaki(ue&
ccAetUw tuigaining

Economic

Sodal

Fconomic cohedoti*

well-belne

well-being

bdanced devdopment

Peftidpedon in vakititeering

Source: Hamessing the benefits of well-being policies and investments for health. Copenhagen: WHO Regional
Office for Europe; 2023 (https://www.who.int/europe/publications/m/ltem/harnessing-the-benefits-of-wellbeing-policies-and-investments-for-health, accessed 13 November 2023).

We recognize that a well-being economy is designed and meant to serve people's well-being and
protect the planet, with the economy delivering for our communities and the environment. We

therefore build on the One Health approach and the Copenhagen Consensus of Mayors: Healthier
and Happier Cities for All and reaffirm our commitment to the six key themes and to ensuring that
our policies are structured around them.

We commit to shifting towards a well-being economy by reorienting and advocating for
investment in priorities that promote human, social, economic and planetary well-being. By
responding to current challenges and preparing for fliture generations, we aim to cultivate a
sustainable and inclusive society that gives priority to the overall welfare of individuals,
communities and the environment, striving for a world in which well-being is at the forefront of
our policies, progress and prosperity and no one is left behind.

We consider that the process of integrating well-being across the European Region is an essential
Step in aiigning our mandates to strengthen cooperation and coordination between cities, sectors
and stakeholders at the locai level. Cities are at the front line of this transformation and can lead

by example, leveraging their hands-on experience to pioneer innovative well-being initiatives that
can guide broader regional progress towards thriving societies.

As mayors and senior political repräsentatives of cities in the WHO European Healthy Cities
Network, we are committed to advancing the principles of a well-being economy to benefit our
cities and their residents and future generations. Building on the insights and commitments from

decades of action and collaboration across various sectors, we acknowledge the importance ofthe
four types of well-being capital-planetary, human,economic and social-and are putting forward
the following recommendations for specific action in giving priority to the health and weil-being
of our communities.

Planetary weil-being

Cities are vital acceierators of action on ciimate change and planetary well-being, including the
following.

1. Protecting and enhancing the environment. Given the importance of planetary wellbeing, we will work towards creating healthier cities by enhancing air quality, promoting
access to green Spaces and supporting access to safe, clean water. We will actively support
initiatives that reduce pollution and protect biodiversity through partnerships with local
stakeholders, piloting Community initiatives and increasing awareness on how ciimate
change and extreme weather events affect human health. Ensuring that the people who are
at the highest risk from ciimate change are not also the most severely affected is vital.
2. Integrating well-being into urban planning. We recognize that cities can strategically
use Urban planning in shaping tiie well-being of our residents. We will work towards
integrating well-being indicators into our city planning processes, ensuring that decisions
on infrastructiirei,Ebusing, management of natural Spaces, regeneration and transport give

priority to humail and planetary well-being. Through effective urban planning, we can
foster entreprbheurship, innovation and sustainable business practices. This approach
contributes to economic growth that is not only inclusive but also environmentally
conscious, aligning with our vision of a flourishing and equitable society.
3;^ IPromotingsusta

We remain committed to advocating for sustainable

.dommunities 'tlupugh transformative approaches such as the circular economy and
■ adopting new ways tp promote renewable energy sources and enhancing energy efficiency

tpjininimize carbon emissions while promoting the uptake of novel financing mechanisms
to bpnefit the environment and incorporating social and health benefits within these
processes.

Human well-being

4. Giving priori^to health-care Services as drivers of improved health and economic

outcomes.^ We fifmly äöknowledge that the prosperity and progress of any society are
closely rooted to a peärsph's well-being. This fimdamental understanding underscores the
significance of investing in and nurturing the physical, mental and emotional health that
collectively contribute to the quality of life for everyone within our Community. We
understand that a strong public health and health-care system is needed and commit to
investing in initiatives that promote preventive health care, mental health support and
equitable access to high-quality and non-discriminatory health-care Services for all. Health-

^ Boyce T,Brown C. Economic and social Impacts and benefits of health Systems: report. Copenhagen: WHO
Regional Office for Europe;2019(https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/329683, accessed 13 November 2023).

care Services can go fiirther in maximizing their benefits for economies and societies by
proactively using their employment and procurement levers.

5. Empowering through learning and development. We believe that investing in eariy
childhood development and continually supporting lifelong learning opportunities within
wörkplaces and communities are integral to human well-being. These initiatives are
essential building blocks of our dedication to the well-being and prosperity of our
communities to ensure that we are better skilled, connected and equipped to realize our füll
Potential. Investment to support early childhood development is key, establishing strong
foundations for the development of children to mitigate the impact of intergenerational
child poverty and to support the life-course approach to developing health as a key resource
for health and social development.

6. Advocating for health, security and inclusion. In our pursuit of healthier and safer
societies, we as leaders recognize that well-being extends to encompassing essential factors
such as housing, food, migration and security and strongly support the implementation of
universal policies to ensure that every individual has the necessary resources tö thrive. We
recognize the contributions ofolder people to our communities and cities. Supportfor older
people needs to be a priority. Investment to support those who live alone and want to

continue living at home is invaluable. Focusing on each individuaTs needs is required to
find new homes in residential care. Older people's skills and talents need to be recognized
and applauded while focusing on problems such as loneliness, iiiipaired mobility, vision
and hearing and especially dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Healthy ageing and agefriendly communities need to be a strong focus, including whole-of govemment
responsibility for healthy ageing throughout the life-course.®
7. Improving mental health ofadolescents and young adults, fostering participatory

decision-making and inclusive practices and incorporating meaningful youth
engagement.. The pressure on mental health is most urgent among adolescents and young
adults, and this is the time to focus on reducing underlying causes(such as pressure to perform,
an individualizing society and strong focus on quick fixes)and offering perspective, in terms of
economic wellbeing, social support, empathy and Community spirit, and care, for a resilient and
mentally healthy generation. The mental health of adolescents and young adults and including
them in both society and the economy are vital to fiiture healthy, fairer and prosperous societies
and also a key point of convergence across health, labour, social policy and education. Solutions
can only be found by working in co-creation with the adolescents and young adults themselves.

At the local level, we will promote well-being approaches by encouraging public
dialogue and including diverse voices, with an emphasis on engaging young people in
decision-making processes. We will establish spaces for young voices to be heard and
valued.

Economic well-being

® Lisbon Outcome Statement: regional summit on policy innovation for healthy ageing in the WHO European
Region. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023 (https://www.who.int/europe/publications/m/item/lisbonoutcome-statement, accessed 13 November 2023).

8. Promoting inclusive and sustainable economic growth, guided by proactive city
leadership. We acknowledge that workforce well-being is a key component of a wellbeing economy. This includes advocating for public health-oriented policies such as living
wages, fair and decent work, safe workplaces and social protection to enable people to
thrive. In addition, it is imperative to emphasize the importance of addressing not only
physical health but also to take concerted action to enhance mental health and foster highquality social links. These aspects fundamentally drive a well-being economy. We are
dedicated to actively seeking input from various perspectives, including young people, on
spending priorities (such as gender budgeting and pafticipatory budgeting) and
incorporating their unique perspectives into such areas as education, health care,
environmental sustainability and youth-focused initiatives. Moreover, to ensure
comprehensive inclusive practices, we remain steadfast in our commitment to designing
policies that encourage equal opportunities within workplaces and ensuring that genderresponsive practices are integrated across all sectors and result in positive outcomes.

9. Recognizing the responsibility of public and private actors for health-promoting and
health-enabling practices. In tackling the commercial determinants of health and

advancing the well-being economy, we advocate for public and private actors taking an
active role and cooperating, both as employers and as health promoters, to achieve these
goals. This involves engaging civil society, implementing conflict-of-interest policies and
encouraging transparent dialogues with industry stakeholders. Given the vital role of city
leaders in shaping and implementing policies that give priority to public health and
economic sustainability, we emphasize the importance ofsupporting regulation, legislation
and incentives apd mihimizing health-harming commercial determinants of health. To
drive progress, we as eitles will focus on strategies between local govemment,civil society
and the priviäte sector to align efforts to improve public health outcomes. By taking these
specific Steps, eitles can effectively address the commercial determinants of health,
promoting a well-being economy that gives priority to the health and prosperity of our
communities.

10.Boosting investmcint in eitles through fair taxation. We endorse fair taxation policies
that drive progress in our eitles and align with the principles of a well-being economy.
Giyen the central role eitles play in fostering well-being and prosperity, we emphasize the
necessity to increase investment in our urban centres. Through fair taxation practices and
policies, we can generate the necessary revenue to fliel transformative actions within our

cities. These Investments should be linked to transparent and accountable govemance,
ensuring optimal and equitable resource allocation. Effectively directing investment will
lay the foundation for a well-being economy that uplifts our cities.
Social well-being

11. Enabling individuals through participation, trust and volunteering, recognizing that
health begins at home and within the Community. Trust, sense of belonging and social
cohesion lie at the heart of social well-being. Since building well-being economies and
addressing health equity require active Community engagement, we strive to enable
individuals by establishing platforms for public participation, seeking and encouraging

diverse voices and perspectives in decision-making processes and ensuring that action is
community-driven.

We firmly beiieve that health and well-being Start at home and within communities.
Adopting a Community development approach, we advocate for locai interventions that

empower residents to actively participate in and contribute to shaping their own well-being.
This approach promotes a sense ofownership and responsibility, fostering a stronger sense
of trust, belonging and social cohesion.

Since volunteerism strongly influences social well-being, we recognize volunteering as a
powerflil means through which individuals can actively contribute to their communities

and foster a sense of belonging and trust. These combined efforts are directed at uplifting
communities and building trust within communities and institutions, ultimately shaping a
more cohesive and prosperous society.

12. Embracing diversity and inclusion: we reaffirm our commitment to equity and social
justice. We will work towards tackling health and social inequalities by ensuring that all
residents, regardless ofage, gender,ethnicity or place oforigin, have access to high-quality
health care, education, social Services, and life opportunities. Further, cities will give
priority to Community safety initiatives and programmes aimed at reducing violence and
creating secure living environments.

In adopting these actions, we align ourselves with the principles of the well-being economy and
pledge to make our cities healthier, more equitable and sustainable to behefit everyone.

