Anlage 2

Open call – NetZeroCities
Pilot Cities Programme
Call Form Template

This template supports proposals for funding under Horizon Europe, Grant
Agreement number: HORIZON-RIA-SGA-NZC-101121530

Call Opens: 16 January 2024, 12.00 CET
Deadline: 18 March 2024, 17.00 CET
Call ID: NZC-SGA-HE-202401

Publication Date: 16 January 2024
netzerocities.eu

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

Disclaimer
The content of this document reflects only the author’s view. The European
Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it
contains.

2

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

Contents
1.

Pilot City Application Details ............................................................................... 4
1.1. Project acronym ............................................................................................ 4
1.2. Is this a multi-Mission-city application? ......................................................... 4
1.3. City department (or equivalent) engagement ................................................ 5
1.4. Stakeholders ................................................................................................. 6
1.5. Please confirm that you have uploaded the city/cities' letter(s) of support in
the Files section ...................................................................................................... 7

2.

Project Overview ................................................................................................. 8
2.1. Pilot City overview (max 2,500 characters) ................................................... 8
2.2. Pilot City Alignment - Please identify where your pilot activities align and link
to the NZC Pilot Cities Programme's eligible activities and provide a brief
description. ............................................................................................................. 9
2.3. EU Dimension and complementary activities .............................................. 12

3.

Mandate to Act .................................................................................................. 17
3.1. Pilot Mandate to Act .................................................................................... 17
3.2. Understanding the Problem(s) .................................................................... 20
3.3. Orienting to systemic solution(s) ................................................................. 25

4.

Capacity to Act .................................................................................................. 28
4.1. Collaboration and engagement ................................................................... 28
4.2. Cross-cutting considerations ....................................................................... 30
4.3. Capacity and capability ............................................................................... 32
4.4. Soundness of work plan .............................................................................. 34

5.

Impact ............................................................................................................... 36
5.1. Pilot activities' (learning/reflexive) governance ............................................ 36
5.2. Pilot activities' outcomes and direct/indirect impact .................................... 37
5.3. Pilot activities' scalability, replication, and risk management....................... 37

6.

Declarations and key word tags ........................................................................ 39
6.1. Alignment to NZC Pilot Cities Programme eligible activities ....................... 39
6.2. City Learning Programme ........................................................................... 39
6.3. Other EU funded programmes/calls ............................................................ 39
6.4. Other EU funded programmes/Calls (max 5000 characters) ...................... 39
6.5. Key word tags ............................................................................................. 39

3

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

1. Pilot City Application Details
1.1. Project acronym
Optionally provide an acronym for your Pilot City project

EnAct4CleanCities - Enabling and activating for a clean and inclusive energy transition

1.2. Is this a multi-Mission-city application?
Please use the Yes/No options to indicate if there are multiple Mission Cities present in your
proposal. If selecting "Yes", please note that you will be prompted to provide a rationale for
the multi-city proposal and collaboration.
☒Yes
☐No
1.2.1. (If “Yes” to 1.2) Multi-city application rationale
Please provide a brief rationale for us to understand why these specific cities will be
working together.

The multi-city consortium consists of the City of Dresden and the City of Leipzig. Both
cities are active members of the mission city network and currently united in their efforts to
reduce CO2 emissions focusing on the establishment of a sustainable and decarbonised
heat and energy supply, an essential building block for a climate-neutral future and a
sustainable economic development.
Furthermore, both cities share a geographic vicinity and a common contemporary urban
heritage shaped by 40 years of socialist urban and infrastructure planning as well as a
centralised socialist governance system. This sets them apart from the other seven
German Mission cities and has, for example, impacts on real estate ownership still today
as a large proportion of property owners are not based in the city and are therefore hard to
be reached and activated for climate neutrality measures.
Since 1990, both cities have experienced a profound transformation: A large proportion of
the building stock has been renovated or replaced, and the technical infrastructures and
installations have been modernised. Structures which are advantageous from the energy
perspective, such as the polycentric layout with its positive mix of property uses, the widely
branched public transport network and the district heating system with cogeneration of
heat and power, were retained and developed further.
Acting as lighthouse cities in previous and current German Smart City and EU-Horizon
projects, both cities can rely on a long experience of urban transformation projects on local
and European level.

4

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

1.3. City department (or equivalent) engagement
Please list participating city departments (or equivalent) committed to and relevant for the
implementation of pilot activities.
Relevant to the pilot activities are following city departments and divisions:
Lead applicant city Leipzig:
1. Digital City Unit (RDS): is central department for Leipzig’s Smart City strategies
and projects. Experienced in EU-Horizon projects it will take the lead for
EnAct4CleanCities project. It consists of experts from the fields of architecture,
social sciences, engineering and IT to ensure a holistic approach to smart,
sustainable urban development. Within EnAct4CleanCities it is responsible for the
Leipzig Energy Map, the citizen science tool and Leipzig app.
2. Department for Sustainable Development and Climate protection (RNK) together
with the Digital City Unit the Department is forming the transition team for the EU
Mission on Climate neutral and smart cities. The RNK was established as the
central point of contact for climate protection and sustainability processes in the
city of Leipzig. This department acts as a liaison between citizens, the city
administration, and various businesses, serving in both a technical and
coordinating capacity. The "Climate Protection Core Team," housed within the
department, consists of 6 climate protection managers from different city
departments, including the Department of Urban Green and Water, City Planning
Office, Department of Building Management, Department of Transportation and
Civil Engineering, Department of Economic Development, as well as
representatives from the department itself. This team oversees implementation
tasks, coordinates citywide processes, and provides specialised expertise in
climate protection. To ensure a cross-silo approach the climate protection
managers will be engaged in the EnAct4CleanCities depending on the
development stages of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit.
3. Office for Residential Construction and Urban Renewal: The Office for Residential
Construction and Urban Renewal is responsible for citizen and stakeholder
engagement in Leipzig's energy transition and is joining efforts with RDS to
develop and implement the EnAct4CleanCities knowledge hub for property owners
in the energy transition.
4. Leipzig Weiterdenken (LWD): As the coordinating body for citizen participation and
civic engagement, "Leipzig thinking ahead" establishes the groundwork for a new
culture of involvement. This is achieved through organizing participation events,
surveys, and online dialogues, as well as providing advisory functions within the
city administration. Functioning as a central hub, knowledge repository, and guide
for the topics of "citizen participation" and "civic engagement," LWD coordinates
these areas within the administration. LWD advances innovative ways of
participation and foster exchange between citizens, administration, and
policymakers, aiming for community-oriented urban development.
Co-applicant city Dresden:
1. Climate protection office: It coordinates Dresden’s Integrated Energy and Climate
Action Plan, assists in the preparation of the Climate City Contract and is

5

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
responsible for Dresden’s municipal heat planning and implementation of the heat
transition in the municipality. The Climate protection office will be the coordinating
the pilot project as the local lead partner.
2. City Strategy unit in the Mayor’s office: The City Strategy office coordinates the
EU-Mission “100 climate neutral and smart cities” assisted by the relevant
departments of the municipality, including the climate protection office; the smart
city unit of the Dresden economic development agency, which manages the
mission projects NEUTRAL PATH and MOBILITIES4EU, the EU-affairs
coordinator and the citizen participation unit in the Mayor’s office.

Co-applicant: Stadtentwicklungs- und -sanierungsgesellschaft Dresden mbH
(STESAD, Urban development and renovation company Dresden mbH):
STESAD GmbH is a full-service provider for the City of Dresden in the real estate
sector since 1992. With a staff of 126 employees, the STESAD team now works
hand in hand and on an equal footing in nine business areas. In this respect, the
company's portfolio ranges from project development and investment,
infrastructure projects, project management of residential and educational
buildings to the awarding of contracts and overall urban development measures as
well as facility management of exposed buildings. The company is committed to
the targeted development and realization of sustainable and resource-efficient
urban development solutions that meet human needs throughout the city. In this
regard, the Project Development and Participation business area works
cooperatively and in partnership with the public as part of real estate and urban
development projects.

1.4. Stakeholders
Please list engaged/to be engaged stakeholders for the implementation of your proposed
pilot activities.
To secure a multi-stakeholder approach Leipzig and Dresden will cooperate with different
stakeholders on local and state level that represent state organisations but also the to be
adressed target groups.
Sächsische Energieagentur GmbH (SAENA)- SAENA (Saxonian Energy Agency) is the
state-wide point of contact for all citizens, municipalities, and businesses in the field of
energy and climate protection in Saxony. SAENA provides independent and competent,
motivating and empowering societal groups to enhance energy efficiency and climate
protection sustainably through their own actions.
Verbraucherzentrale Sachsen- The "Consumer Advice Center Saxony" provides
information, advice, and assistance to consumers regarding their rights, responsibilities,
and recourse options in dealing with products, services, or disputes with businesses also
in energy and climate related issues.
Saxon State Ministry for Energy, Climate Protection, Environment and Agriculture
(SMEKUL) - Together with the subordinate authorities the State Ministry for Energy,
Climate Protection, Environment and Agriculture, bundles technical and political
competencies and regulates and promotes protecting our livelihoods, preserving

6

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
biodiversity, shaping the energy transition and sustainable agriculture and forestry in
Saxony.
Energieeffizienz- und Klimaschutz-Netzwerk Leipzig (EEKN): the EEKN was founded
by Leipzig’s own utility Stadtwerke Leipzig and the Leipzig Chamber for Trade and
Commerce to explore and develop energy efficiency roadmaps with local enterprises. It is
one of the key stakeholders in engaging businesses in the climate city contract process in
Leipzig.
The Leibniz Institute for Ecological Spatial Development (IOER):
The Leibniz Institute for Ecological Spatial Development (IOER) is concerned with the
sustainable development and transformation of cities and regions. It has been researching
the characteristics, typology and performance of buildings for many years and developing
models and tools for assessing climate change-related risks such as heat, heavy rain or
floods (including HeatResilientCity, FLOOD.Bi, 3D heavy rain portal, building database),
the PV potential or the energy requirements. The IOER draws primarily on the experience
of the co-creatively developed and locally operated platform “Colouring Dresden”
(https://colouring.dresden.ioer.info) and the activities in the international network
“Colouring Cities Research Programme”.

1.5. Please confirm that you have uploaded the city/cities'
letter(s) of support in the Files section
Please confirm that you have completed the upload of your Letter(s) of Support in the Files
section of this submission platform.
☒ Confirmed City of Dresden
☒ Confirmed City of Leipzig

7

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

2. Project Overview
2.1. Pilot City overview (max 2,500 characters, 0,5 pages)
Please briefly outline the issues you aim to address, and how. What is your vision for the
outcomes of this work? How will it help your city in its journey towards carbon neutrality? This
will be used publicly to profile and describe the submissions received under this Call.

The local energy and heat transition is a central challenge for the cities of Leipzig and
Dresden on their way to climate neutrality. This goes hand in hand with the energyefficient renovation of buildings and neighbourhoods. For the transition to succeed,
communities must rely on a large ecosystem of stakeholders, namely property owners and
energy suppliers.
However, the changes in these large-scale infrastructures, in the energy supply and new
national regulations, especially regarding the change in energy and heating systems, have
led to uncertainty among parts of the population. The key concerns of both citizens and
companies include, e.g., modernisation of heating systems, access to heating
technologies, assessment of energy costs or feasibility of new technologies.
Understanding municipal heat planning processes, exploring innovative renovation options
and identifying funding opportunities are also top priorities.
Municipalities have a crucial mediating role to address these uncertainties. They must
answer the question on the status of the local energy transition planning and of how
affected stakeholders, especially property owners, can be informed about options for
action. And the public also needs to be engaged and activated through (digital) activation
tools, small interventions such as citizen science projects and challenges to promote
behavioural change using gamification approaches.
The vision of the EnAct4CleanCities pilot project is to provide clear and relevant
information and support property owners and other stakeholders in their decision-making
journey. To achieve this, the EnAct4CleanCities toolkit is created to increase knowledge
and acceptance among citizens and stakeholders and to activate them for change.
The EnAct4CleanCities pilot will develop, test and pilot a digital toolbox for informing,
activating and involving relevant target groups in the energy transition at district and city
level. The tool kit includes e.g. a digital knowledge hub and platform for property owners in
each city, as well as digital citizen challenges and digital information and activation tools
for home and property owners.
The EnAct4CleanCities pilot builds on existing studies, tools, projects and structures in
both cities to strengthen impact and align the efforts of authorities and stakeholders.
Integrated into the NZC pilot cities program, this will establish knowledge transfer and
learning activities at local, regional, national and European level.

8

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
2.2. Pilot City Alignment - Please identify where your pilot
activities align and link to the NZC Pilot Cities Programme's
eligible activities and provide a brief description.
2.2.1. Deploying technology, product, process, service, solution, policy,
governance model
Pioneering activities to support climate-neutrality, including the deployment of
innovative (new or improved) technology, product, process, service, solution,
policy, or governance model at city level, explored in a cross-sectoral and
systemic manner.
☒Yes
☐No

(If yes) Please briefly describe the alignment of proposed pilot activities to the selected
eligible activities (max 2500 characters):

EnAct4CleanCities will pilot new technical service products and link them to the
overall heating and energy transformation strategies in both cities. The pilots will be
systemically integrated into the cities heat and energy planning, smart participation
and climate strategies. Following the levers of change - including
democracy/participation, technology and governance/policy by introducing and testing
- new processes and co-designed digital services will be applied.
Pilot-co-creation activities include the mapping of local conditions and planning and
designing EnAct4CleanCities’ digital toolkit to address the overall vision of the project –
to inform and activate citizens and stakeholders for the heating and energy transition.
The Leipzig pilot will develop and test different digital solutions, such as:







Update of Leipzig Energy Map (GIS-based planning tool) and publication of
energy transition related data (on Data Portal Leipzig, GIS and dashboards)
Development of digital knowledge hub as a “one-stop-shop" for property
owners incl. Information on current city plannings (e.g. municipal heat
planning), availability and potential of RES use on-site, potentials for energetic
refurbishment of the building, matching consultation and funding opportunities
Citizen-Science tool: invite citizens to share data and provide more insightful
data e.g. on energy consumption, potential areas for RES etc.
Leipzig app: the city’s own application will be enhanced by a gamification
approach giving out challenges to the citizens e.g. regarding climate friendly
behaviour, and to communicate ambitions of the Climate City Contract.

The Dresden pilot will focus on 3 different digital solutions for the tool kit:




Development of a smart digital information platform based on GIS and heat
planning data, the digital urban energy twin – providing low level, well designed
and easy to understand individual information.
Development of digital activation tool for property owners - based on the digital
information platform - matching relevant information and potentially affected
stakeholders (e.g. property owners and network developers), incl. gamification
elements and consultation on funding opportunities.

9

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)


Update of Dresden Cleema app: the city’s own application will be enhanced by
a tool to give out challenges to the citizens e.g. gamification to foster climate
friendly behaviour, and to communicate the ambitions of the Climate City
Contract.

2.2.2. Strengthening cities’ use of scientific research
Systemic, science-based innovative initiatives that strengthen citiesâ€™ use of
scientific research and ensure translation of research results into policy actions,
to accelerate climate neutrality in the sectors/domains of water, food, energy,
industry, housing and deep building retrofitting, transport, and mobility through the
levers of green technology (i.e. digitalisation), behavioural/lifestyle change, social
innovation, culture, policy and regulation, finance, and new business models
(e.g., circular economy). These innovations shall account for co-benefits (e.g.,
health promotion) and the "Do No Significant Harm DNSH) principle.
☒Yes
☐No
(If yes) Please briefly describe the alignment of proposed pilot activities to the selected
eligible activities (max 2500 characters)
EnAct4CleanCities focuses on digital tools designed to enable and activate target groups
to engage in climate-conscious behaviours, particularly concerning energy and heat
transition. The tools of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit aim at expanding the knowledge
base of property owners regarding current energy transition strategies of the cities but also
possibilities of taking actions at their own buildings.
The project maps and analyses the needs for information and support of different target
groups to get active in energy transition processes, e.g. in taking actions regarding
housing renovation etc. The EnAct4CleanCities toolkit offers various digital tools to
address the different needs of the target groups and serves as an add-on and multiplier to
existing tools and consulting offers. It is meant to complement analogue engagement
activities in the two cities. The digital tools to be developed will be continuously evaluated
through the whole development and implementation process based on various criteria,
including user-friendliness, technical requirements, implementation efforts, and impact.
The assessment builds upon existing methods and tools of procedures from Leipzig’s
"Connected Urban Twins" project focussing on assessing different digital engagement and
participation tools.
However, measuring the effectiveness of such interventions poses a challenge. Both the
actual change in awareness and the resulting CO2 savings are difficult to quantify and
monitor. Scientific support from the NZC would therefore be appreciated to exploit the tool
kit in the best possible and sustainable way after the end of the project. This also concerns
the financing of the toolkit. Usually, alternative financing models and the use of private
capital is not an option for German cities. EnAct4CleanCities therefore requires guidance
on how new financing models can be made possible within the framework of German
regulations.
Both cities will benefit from the scientific partner Leipzig Institute of Ecological Urban and
Regional Development (IOER) who investigates transformative change linked to
neighbourhoods, cities and regions and will contribute in particular to the MEL of co-

10

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
benefits and the impact of social innovations and governance approaches, instruments
and methods to increase the capacity to initiate, navigate, accelerate and stabilise
transformative change in Leipzig and Dresden for the heating and energy transition.

2.2.3. Establishing new knowledge, building capacity and capabilities
Activities to support climate-neutrality to establish new knowledge and build
capacity and capabilities of city government and associated local actors through
training, workshops, and other forms of learning.
☒Yes
☐No
(If yes) Please briefly describe the alignment of proposed pilot activities to the selected
eligible activities (max 2500 characters)
EnAct4CleanCities covers a range of learning processes relevant to cities aiming for
climate neutrality in increasing knowledge, e.g. of specific stakeholder groups like property
owners, to actively take part in heating and energy transitions and provides digital tools for
a user-friendly and tailored approach.
The two cities are already working collaboratively across departmental boundaries to
promote climate neutrality through digital and smart solutions. EnAct4CleanCities further
contributes to this internal approach as, for example, interim results are also disseminated
and discussed among the CCC transition teams in both cities. Increasing the knowledge
base and capacities within the municipalities will also help transferring the tool kit to
activate various stakeholder groups (e.g. further development of tools for businesses,
children, and adolescents, among others).
An ongoing city2city process will include among others workshops for stakeholder
mapping and joint requirement and validation approaches for the tool kit concept.
Furthermore, EnAct4CleanCities contributes to create new knowledge and support
exchange and peer2peer learning on regional, national and international level:

1. Regional peer learning for Saxon local communities: On a regional level, the
findings and outcomes of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit will be presented and
discussed with other cities in Saxony through the collaboration with regional
Energy Agency of Saxony (SAENA) and the Saxonian Ministry for Energy, Climate
and Environment (SMEKUL). Bi-annual workshops in different locations in Saxony
and study visits to LPZ and DD are organised together with the Energy Agency of
Saxony (SAENA) and information and learnings of the pilot will be shared through
the agency's website.
2. National peer learning in the stronGERcities network: Dresden and Leipzig are
active members of the German Mission Cities network stronGERcities. Besides the
bi-weekly exchange of the stronGERcities network, EnAct4CleanCities will share
findings in this framework and engage with other German Mission Pilot City
projects such as CoLAB. Through the stronGERcities network, pilot results will
also be communicated to the federal level.
3. EU-wide learning through NetZeroCities replication and Twin-City programmes.
EnAct4CleanCities organises tailored mentoring visits to twin cities and hosts twin

11

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
cities for study/shadow visits based on identified needs for experience sharing and
learning.

2.2.4. Building more collaborative communities
Activities aiming to build more collaborative communities, to advance new
governance models at city level, and to engage citizens (including
vulnerable/marginalised groups) and enable them to act on climate change in a
systemic and cross-sectoral manner.
☐Yes
☐No
(If yes) Please briefly describe the alignment of proposed pilot activities to the selected
eligible activities (max 2500 characters)
The EnAct4CleanCities ambition is to enable and activate different target groups in energy
and heating transition by creating transparency on municipal strategies (e.g. heating
planning), the status quo of energy transition by publishing energy transition relevant data
and by offering tailored information and advice to property owners. By focussing on
transparency and information, the EnAct4CleanCities partners want to reduce
uncertainties among property owners on the consequences of the ambitious energy
transition plans to reach climate neutrality (see also sec. 3.2).
The EnAct4CleanCities will therefore include information tools addressing the general
public (e.g. Leipzig Energy Map), esp. property owners (Knowledge Hubs in Leipzig in
Dresden) but also includes tools for activating citizens, e.g. to take part in challenges
related to climate neutral behaviour (enhancement of Leipzig and Dresden Apps) or
contribute to data bases on energy transition via Citizen Science projects (Leipzig).
Through a broad-reaching targeting of audiences, EnAct4CleanCities aims to activate as
many people as possible for opportunities of the energy and heating transition and
motivate them towards more climate-friendly behaviours and decision-making. Both impact
destinations or intervention areas respectively are essential on Leipzig’s and Dresden’s
pathway towards climate neutrality.
EnAct4CleanCities will also strengthen co-creation structures within the municipalities
linking the topic of climate neutrality closer to digitalization measures (see 3.2.5).

2.3. EU Dimension and complementary activities
2.3.1. EU, national, regional policy alignment (max 5000 characters)
Please briefly outline how the pilot activities connect, align with, and are
complementary to, ambitious EU, national and/or regional policy and strategy,
such as the EGD, the Climate Pact, the New European Bauhaus and the Horizon
Europe climate-neutral cities Mission.

EnAct4CleanCities aims at the expansion of local renewable energies use, increasing energy
efficiency and a sustainable heating transition. Being Mission cities, both Leipzig and Dresden
align the pilot to the EU Commission’s Mission on carbon neutral and smart cities 2030,
becoming lighthouse cities and role models for the EU’s goal of being climate neutral by 2050.

12

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
Thus, the pilot activities fit into the EU’s package of policies to implement the European Green
Deal, with concrete reduction targets, e.g. for the "Fit for 55" package of measures, the EU
Commission is pursuing the concrete target of reducing CO2 emissions by 55% by 2030
(compared to 1990).
Furthermore, the EU Climate Protection Act includes mechanisms for budgeting emissions, a
ban on subsidies for the use of fossil fuels and a right to climate protection. The provision and
use of energy as well as the joint efforts to promote the expansion of renewable energies and
the intelligent and efficient use of these is of particularly importance for EnAct4CleanCities. In
addition, the pilot contributes to objectives set out for the “Energy Efficiency Directive”
encouraging local public bodies and social housing bodies governed by public to adopt an
energy efficiency plan and put in place an energy management system. Furthermore, the
following objectives fit the pilot activities: creating energy efficiency policies that should be
inclusive, ensure accessibility to energy efficiency measures for consumers affected by energy
poverty, benefiting in particular vulnerable households. Additionally, consumers in multiapartment buildings with collective heating systems shall be given clearer rights to receive
more frequent information on their energy consumption to control their bills. These objectives
are aligned with the overall aims and activities of EnAct4CleanCities, as the pilot will make use
of innovative technologies to collect data and inform both citizens and homeowners about
climate and energy policy issues as well as make their energy usage more transparent and
motivate them to act sustainably.
The pilot’s objectives and activities fit also into the landscape of EU funded initiatives and
programmes, like the New European Bauhaus to create enriched, sustainable and inclusive
cities and neighbourhoods and to lever green and digital challenges to transform both cities for
the better as well to address complex societal problems together through co-creation. In
addition, Leipzig and Dresden are part of the Smart City community on EU and national level
with projects, e.g. EU Smart City projects MAtchUP (Dresden) or Triangulum and SPARCS
(Leipzig) or national projects like the model project for intelligent districts (Dresden) and
Connected Urban Twins (CUT (urban data platform and digital twins for integrated city
development), emphasising the “smart” Mission contribution towards carbon-neutral and
liveable cities. Dresden is also partner in the Horizon Europe Mission project NEUTRALPATH
which aims at paving the way towards climate-neutral cities through the development of
positive and clean energy districts (PCEDs) and the co-design of efficient, climate-friendly
solutions.
EnAct4CleanCities will also match with foreseen objectives of the upcoming “Social Climate
Fund”, as a very important policy and funding option for a just transition in Europe aiming to
mitigate financial stress on vulnerable populations due to the increase in fossil fuel costs to
prevent energy and transport poverty by providing funding for measure for e.g. increased
energy efficiency of buildings, decarbonisation of heating and cooling or integrating of
renewable energies.
Germany’s responsibility at national level to implement the internationally and in particular the
EU-wide agreed targets, is reflected in the Federal Climate Protection Act, establishing a
binding commitment for the overall target to reduce - compared to 1990 levels - greenhouse
gas emissions by at least 65% by 2030 and by at least 88% by 2040. Net emissions nationwide
are to be zero by 2045. Further important legislation is enacted through the Building Energy
Act (GEG) regulating specifications for the energy quality of buildings, creation and use of
energy certificates, the use of renewable energies in buildings and for local authorities, the use
of renewable energies in new buildings and renovations. Furthermore, the act for heat planning
and the decarbonisation of heating networks with the obligation of the federal states implement
municipal heat planning incl. heat plans by 30 June 2026 municipal areas with more than
100.000 inhabitants (i.e. mandatory for both cities Leipzig and Dresden). In the Free State of
Saxony, the strategic direction of energy and climate policy up to 2030 is also set out in the
Saxony Energy and Climate Program. Although this program does not formulate its own

13

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
reduction targets, it does refer to the national target, which serves as the most important
orientation.

2.3.2. Transferability (max 5000 characters)
Please describe the potential relevance and transferability of your pilot activities
beyond your own city’s context (i.e. to other cities in Europe). Please note this
information will not be assessed however it will be used in the matchmaking
process for the City Learning Programme.
First, the regional – county level – exchange between Leipzig and Dresden will ensure that
experience and knowledge will be transferred within both cities. The co-design and cocreation approaches for the development of the tools are also based on the transferability
criteria between the two cities. Furthermore, the state level stakeholders SAENA
(Saxonian Energy Agency), the "Consumer Advice Center Saxony" and the Saxon State
Ministry for Energy, Climate Protection, Environment and Agriculture (SMEKUL), together
with the subordinate authorities the State Ministry for Energy, Climate Protection,
Environment and Agriculture, will support and address the question of transferability of
EnAct4CleanCities pilot results to other cities and communities in Saxony.
Second, Leipzig and Dresden are involved in the StronGER network of the German
Mission cities which all have the objectives of EnAct4CleanCities high on their agenda for
their Mission’s transition path and Climate City Contracts. In addition, both cities are part
of the national Smart City model projects’ funding programme and platform and will
exchange on project results against the background of potential transferability to other
smart cities. Third, the consortium is involved in various European projects (see below
sec. 2.3.3). The dissemination and exploitation work of these projects will be used to
foster transferability. In addition, as foreseen by the NZC Mission platform, the consortium
cities Leipzig and Dresden will participate in the Twinning Learning Program as well as
summer schools or pilot coaching sessions and share their experience and knowledge.
Furthermore, both cities will provide valuable insights and results for regulative
frameworks on national level, i.e. the Heat Planning Act in Germany (enacted since
January 1, 2024) aiming for all German heating networks to be climate-neutral by 2045
and all approximately 11,000 municipalities in Germany must have heat planning in place
by mid-2028. Together with the Building Energy Act (GEG), which applies after the
completion of municipal heat planning, higher requirements regarding building
renovation/heating system replacement apply for property owners. This necessitates
further information and consultation demands for property owners to motivate them to
actively take part in energy transition but also requests higher transparency regarding the
state of energy transition (e.g. uptake of RES production). Thus, EnAct4CleanCities will
provide important pilot results with a high transferability potential, e.g. for the challenge of
enabling and activating house owners in energy and heating transition and the pilot
activities can showcase possible digital solutions to solve the questions of involvement.
The EnAct4CleanCities toolkit therefore represents a framework for facilitating stakeholder
activation, characterised by robust transferability and substantial potential for
dissemination across diverse contexts among Europe.

2.3.3. Current/past pilot-complementary activities (max 5000 characters)
Please provide a brief overview and review of current/past activities related to the
pilot activities proposal (including R&I actions and outcomes), including learnings

14

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
and insights drawn from these experiences. In the event that no activities have
been undertaken to date, please specify this.
The pilot activities of EnAct4CleanCities build upon a variety of predecessor and ongoing
projects and initiatives in both cities.
Leipzig has been developing so-called “energetic refurbishment concepts” for different
neighbourhoods since 2015 (supported by federal funding programs). Followed up by an
“energetic refurbishment management”, the ambition was to motivate private property
owners to and support them in energy transition and refurbishment processes. Due to the
heterogenous owner structures in many districts in Leipzig and Dresden, the impacts of
the management on the property owners were limited as the participation measures
mainly focused on analogue formats. EnAct4CleanCities builds upon the learning of those
processes and will define solutions to overcome the challenges faced.
Both cities have been or are successfully implementing EU projects related to Smart City
and the heating and energy transition (Leipzig: Triangulum, SPARCS, Dresden: MatchUp,
NEUTRALPATH, MOBILITIES4EU). These projects focused particularly on the
development of digital solutions, aiming to reduce energy and heat consumption within
buildings themselves and to inform and encourage various stakeholder groups to adopt
energy-saving behaviours e.g. via digital tools. Through those international cooperation
projects, both cities have established strong consortia at the local level involving research
institutions, businesses, and civil society organisations.
Both cities are part of the German Smart City Program, focusing on smart and sustainable
urban development. Together with Hamburg und Munich, Leipzig is jointly developing
Urban Digital Twins for use in integrated urban development in the project “Connected
Urban Twins https://www.connectedurbantwins.de/en/) The project is exploring new digital
forms of collaboration to complement analogue formats and tools for the participation of
urban society in a meaningful way. As such, Leipzig has already implemented digital
participation tools (e.g. https://matthaeikirchhof-beteiligung.leipzig.de) for integrated urban
development and has assessed over 20 digital participation tools e.g. regarding their
usability for cities and targets groups and technical requirements. EnAct4CleanCities
expands on those findings and advances the applied assessment methodology.
This is not the only utilization of digital tools for stakeholder engagement in Leipzig and
Dresden. Experiences from previous projects as well as existing technical infrastructure
will serve as a base to create the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit.
The Leipzig Energy Map Leipzig is a navigation tool designed for the energy transition,
serving as a digital twin of renewable energy potentials and plants. The primary goal of the
Energy Map Leipzig is to identify renewable energy potentials and to present the
expansion status of renewable energy systems. So far, the map is only for city-internal
use. Yet the data displayed is also valuable for citizens as it provides information about the
state of the energy transition in Leipzig and on neighbourhood level. EnAct4CleanCities
will therefore further develop the map to be accessible and comprehensible for citizens
(e.g. with the help of dash boards.)
Dresden employs digital tools for citizen engagement in mobility and sustainability. The
Mobil-O-Mat simulates mobility measures' effects for future planning, allowing individuals
to propose from 50 options, fostering diverse input. Participation is voluntary and
anonymous, with results shared online. The Cleema app promotes sustainable behaviour,
offering advice, updates, and challenges, including local businesses. Its focus is on
making sustainability enjoyable, with continuous improvements based on user feedback.
Leipzig has released his own city application Leipzig App in the beginning of 2024. While it
is currently used mainly for providing information to Leipzig citizens and giving access to
public services, the application will be further developed as a tool to directly involve
citizens in planning processes but also information on climate friendly behaviour. Within

15

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
EnAct4CleanCities, technical features for implementing so-called “challenges” to nudge
climate friendly behaviour will be developed and piloted.

16

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

3. Mandate to Act
3.1. Pilot Mandate to Act
3.1.1. Political support and endorsement (max 2500 characters)
Please describe how the ambition is politically supported and endorsed, including
the nature and strength of the support. (You may refer to published, online
documentation via link(s) accordingly)

Leipzig: Since joining the European Energy Award (eea) in 2009, the city of Leipzig has
been engaged in an expanding process of climate protection. This includes establishing
structures within the administration to develop and implement measures, as well as broad
civic engagement in the areas of climate and environmental protection. With the Leipzig
City Council's decision to declare a climate emergency 2019, ambitious goals were
expressed as political will: by 2035, the city administration and by 2040 at the latest, the
entire city should be climate neutral. Additionally, in 2020, an immediate action program
with over 24 urgently implementable measures was adopted.
With the Energy and Climate Protection Program 2030 (SECAP), the city of Leipzig has
presented an ambitious framework. Through ten success factors, Leipzig aims to have
implemented 100 measures by 2030 across its seven action areas. With the endorsement
of the SECAP by the city council in 2022 the city council has also committed to increase
efforts to reach Leipzig neutrality by 2030 within the 100 Cities Mission. The SECAP is
supported by biennial implementation programs which will also be endorsed by city council.

Dresden: In 2020, the Dresden City Council decided to update the Dresden climate
protection goals with greenhouse gas neutrality to be achieved well before 2050 and to
revise the existing integrated energy and climate protection concept.
In this resolution, climate protection has been declared a top priority for urban governance
and decision making. Through a citizens' petition, initiated by the Dresden Zero, the city
council decided in 2022, that, as part of the update of the Integrated Energy and Climate
Protection Concept (IEK), the goal of climate neutrality would be set by 2035. By 12/2023,
the IEK was completed by the Climate Protection unit which co-developed the concept with
the participation of the local energy provider SachsenEnergie AG, other city administration
offices and in-house companies and in stakeholder consultations. It includes results from
the potential study for renewable building energy supply, which provided a comprehensive
database at building level. With the confirmation of the IEK by the mayor in 02/2024, the
concept was published and is currently being discussed in the political groups and
committees of the city council.

3.1.2. Overarching vision for carbon neutrality (max 2500 characters)
Please describe how the pilot activities connect to the city's overarching vision for
carbon neutrality, and related strategies, operational plans, and other activities.
(You may refer to published, online documentation via link(s) accordingly)

Leipzig:
Transforming the energy and heat sector towards climate neutral technologies is a major
financial and social challenge for the city of Leipzig. Despite the ambition to realize a
sustainable energy transition by substituting fossil fuels such as coal and gas, one has to

17

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
be aware of the social implications due to rising energy prices and the affordability for all
households. The acceptance of an ambitious energy system transformation also depends
on the acceptance and commitment of the whole civil society.
The long-term objective of a cross-sectoral decarbonisation strategy is particularly relevant
for Leipzig in the energy and transport sector, yet this is where municipalities have less
direct influence. Increasing the renewable share for electricity and heat supply is a major
lever to raise a city's degree of self-sufficiency and thereby to become less dependent on
international price developments. The transition of the energy and heating system of the
city as well as climate friendly neighbourhood development are two of the ten success
factors that Leipzig has declared in its SECAP. The EnAct4CleanCities pilot activities
address both aspects.
Dresden:
The proposed pilot activities are in complete alignment with current city planning strategies
and its overarching vision for carbon neutrality. Specifically, they feed into the action field
“G: building energy supply” of the updated Integrated Energy and Climate Protection
Concept (IEK) which includes altogether nine fields of action divided into the following
categories:
G – building energy supply
E – Renewable energies in the area
M – Mobility
I – Industrial processes and product use
L – Agriculture and forestry, land use change
A – Waste and wastewater management
K – Gray energy, construction, consumption and nutrition
S – Technical greenhouse gas sinks
O – Higher-level organization and control
The ongoing site-specific municipal heat plan developed by the end of 2024 will result in a
catalogue of measures as well as a spatial representation of heat supply areas and the
type of supply to be preferred for the respective area. Based on these data and measures
it can be implemented. The participation of SachsenEnergie AG as operator of the
Dresden district heating network and the SachsenNetze GmbH as a gas and electricity
network operator ensures closely interlinked infrastructure planning. This means that
based on the municipal heat planning, the necessary switch to a grid-connected system
could be made.

3.1.3. Connection to city budgeting and financing (max 5000 characters)
Please outline how the pilot activities connect to city budgeting and financing.

City budgeting and financing in Leipzig and Dresden is based on a bi-annual planning
cycle. The current budget cycle ends by the end of 2024. Preparation and planning for the
budget cycle 2025/2026 starts in spring 2024. High energy prices, rising costs for
accommodating refugees, but also rising costs for municipal staff continue to burden the
municipal budget.
The investments necessary for the climate neutral transition of the heating and energy
sector in both cities cannot be provided by the municipalities and their utilities alone.
Private investments, especially from property owners in the transformation of their

18

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
buildings (energetic refurbishment, connection to district heating), are necessary. Although
enabling and activating property owners are key measures in the local SECAPs and
heating plans (under elaboration) in both cities, sufficient financing for those activities is
not secured.
The EnAct4CleanCities pilot will therefore strongly support the acceptance and
implementation of these measures. In the final year of the project (2026), exploitation
plans will be drawn up for both cities, in which the necessary funds and possible business
models for the continuation of the pilots will also be evaluated. As planning for the city
budget period 2027/2028 will begin in mid-2026, the defined budgets for continuation of
the EnAct4CleanCities pilot for the future city budget can be requested.
This is also linked to and coordinated with the development of the investment plan for the
SECAPs and the Climate City Contracts in Leipzig and Dresden.
However, both cities need to further accelerate funding for the energy and climate
transition in Dresden and Leipzig. Thus, participating in various national and EU level
initiatives and lighthouse projects like the EU mission “100 climate-neutral and smart cities
by 2030” is crucial to secure funding, know-how and visibility on an international level.

3.1.4. Complementary city programming (max 5000 characters)
Please outline how the pilot activities connect to complementary city
programming activities, i.e. the multi-annual financial perspective for the city,
linked with an investment plan.
In Leipzig, transitioning to climate-neutral heat supply involves shifting from fossil fuels
(such as natural gas and crude oil) to renewable sources for district heating. This transition
is crucial for significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It also necessitates
evaluating existing structures and embracing innovative solutions. Structuring this
transformation of the heat supply is a key issue for which the city administration is
responsible. Leipzig has already set itself the task of developing a concept for the
transformation of heating in 2021. The administration of the City of Leipzig, Leipziger
Stadtwerke, Netz Leipzig and Leipziger Wohnungs- und Baugesellschaft are to jointly
develop this plan. The aim, which is supported by the measures of EnAct4CleanCities, is
to create transparency at an early stage as to what room for manoeuvre exists and what
its added value is in order to achieve the common goal of a climate-neutral heat supply in
Leipzig. The goal here is to draw up a joint plan for the future of the heat supply with the
involvement of all stakeholders.
Thus, the heating transition is in line with the principles of the City of Leipzig's energy and
climate protection processes for the coming years, summarised in the Energy and Climate
Protection Programme 2030 (EKSP 2030), which was adopted by the City Council on 13
October 2022. The objectives of EnAct4CleanCities are also in line with the immediate
measures announced by the city of Leipzig on 30 October 2019 when it declared a climate
emergency. In particular, a climate-friendly and energy-efficient heat supply is a high
priority. Furthermore, EnAct4CleanCities serves as a cross-sectoral link in that the heating
transition is to be achieved through a digital transformation, so that the key objectives of
the City of Leipzig's Digital Agenda can also be realised.
Wärme für Leipzig: Leipzigs Weg zur Dekarbonisierung (waerme-fuer-leipzig.de)
Energie und Klima - Stadt Leipzig
200910_Sofortma-nahmenprogramm_Klimanotstand_2020_FINAL.pdf (leipzig.de)
Digitale Agenda - Stadt Leipzig

Dresden:

19

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
The pilot project is aligned with Dresden’s overall climate protection strategy currently
being debated at the city hall (see 3.1.2), its measures to attract further funding at EU and
national level (3.1.3) and its overall measures to digitalize administrative processes and
tasks.
In the sense of a guiding instrument, the Integrated Energy and Climate Protection
Concept (IEK)forms the basis for further planning and concrete measures as a higherlevel urban strategy and provides the administration a mandate from the city council for
prioritised climate protection work.
In accordance with the political objectives of decarbonization and conversion of the heat
supply to the use of renewable energies, the local energy provider SachsenEnergie AG
has developed its own decarbonization concept which was adopted by the City Council on
14th December 2023, which also includes the decarbonization strategy for the district
heating supply in Dresden. The decarbonization of district heating in Dresden leads to a
high need for investment in network and system construction. This means a significant
increase in the investment rate compared to previous activities, for which certain
requirements must be met. These include the cost-effectiveness and financial viability of
the measures, the availability of personnel and service providers, the necessary support
from politics and administration with approvals and the legal framework and the social
acceptance of the measures on site.

3.2. Understanding the Problem(s)
3.2.1. Selecting the emissions domain(s) your pilot activities will focus on
(IMPORTANT: Please select this in the Proposal Overview tab)
Please select the emissions domains that your pilot activities will focus on from
the Proposal Overview tab
Please identify the relevant emissions domains that your pilot activities will focus on, from the pick
list provided.
1.☒ Consumption of electricity generated for buildings, facilities, and infrastructure
2.☒ Consumption of non-electricity energy for thermal uses in buildings and facilities (e.g., heating,
cooking, etc.)
3.☐ All vehicles and transport (mobile energy)
4.☐ Industrial process emissions
5.☐ Multi-sector waste management and disposal
6.☐ Land use (including agriculture, forestry, and other land uses)

3.2.2. Pilot activities: emissions domain(s) in relation to city's carbon neutrality
(max 5000 characters)

20

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
Please outline the emissions domains the pilot activities will focus on, and the
importance of this/these to the city's carbon neutrality ambition, and how these
emissions are currently being calculated or measured, if applicable.

The EnAct4CleanCities cities of Leipzig and Dresden have identified consumption-related
emissions in the emission areas of heat and energy consumption as overarching
challenges to achieve climate targets an. This is partly because these emissions cannot
be reduced directly by the city administrations themselves, not only for budgeting reasons,
but rely on the voluntary or possibly regulated behaviour of citizens. A climate-neutral heat
and energy supply requires a conversion of district heating to renewable sources and an
exit from fossil fuels such as natural gas and crude oil. Converting the heat supply is
therefore a major lever for efficiently reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Leipzig. At the
same time, the heating transition requires existing structures to be scrutinised and
innovations to be used. Currently, 28% of Leipzig's heat supply is provided by district
heating from natural gas. The remaining 72% is distributed as follows: 48% natural gas,
10% heating oil, 6% local heating, 5% liquid gas, 3% remainder. The CO2 emissions
caused by heating account for around 50% of the city's total emissions. the final energy
consumption of private households amounted to around 41% of the city of Leipzig's total
final energy consumption in 2020. Private household consumption has risen steadily in
recent years, which is partly due to the city's population growth. Yet the per capita
emissions have fallen from 6.5 t CO2e in 2011 to 4.8 t CO2e per inhabitant in 2020. The
energy demand in Leipzig shows that, at 5.7 TWh/a, the energy demand in the heating
sector is more than twice as high as the energy demand in the electricity sector (2.3
TWh/a) and in the transport sector (2.2 TWh/a).
As in Leipzig the transformation of the heating sector is a key priority for the city of
Dresden. Dresden had a total heat requirement of around 4.6 TWh (final energy) in 2021
which is equal to approximately 39 percent of Dresden's total energy requirements. Due to
extensive building renovations and heating conversions to efficient heating solutions such
as district heating and gas condensing boilers since reunification, the average final energy
requirement for space heating and hot water in Dresden has already decreased to 107
kWh/(a*m2). This is a 30.5 percent better value in a German comparison (around 154
kWh/(a*m2)22). Nevertheless, approx. 11,000 buildings (around 15 percent) in Dresden
have a final energy requirement of more than 125 kWh/(a*m2) and are therefore more than
twice as high as the applicable minimum standard for new buildings. This can be
explained, among others, with a relatively high proportion of listed buildings in Dresden of
around 11 percent.
The heating requirements in Dresden are currently covered by two dominant heating
technologies: natural gas boilers (49 percent) and district heating (44.2 percent), which
accounts for around 93.2 percent. Since district heating is currently also essentially based
on natural gas, Dresden is very dependent on this energy raw material for heat supply.
Heating electricity, heating oil and biomass are other relevant heating solutions. Heating
electricity includes both night storage heaters and heat pumps. There are currently around
3,000 heat pumps in operation in Dresden, with both new and old buildings, residential and
non-residential buildings, small and large objects (e.g. school buildings) being heated and
often also cooled with heat pumps. Nevertheless, they play a minor role in covering the
overall heating requirement and do not currently lead to a need to expand the power grid.
The city-wide electricity consumption in 2021 was approximately 2,685 GWh. This
information was made available in aggregated form by the electricity network operator for
the private households (residential buildings), commercial, public buildings and industrial
sectors. The aggregated electricity consumption for industry in 2021 was appro. 1,412 GW
(around 53 percent of total consumption). The semiconductor industry is also particularly
important for Dresden's energy needs, including companies such as Infineon, Global
Foundries, Bosch. In 2018, the semiconductor industry already accounted for 16 percent

21

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
(approx. 420 GWh/a) of Dresden's electricity consumption in the public distribution
network. It increased by 29 percent to approximately 543 GWh/a between 2018 and 2022.
There will be a further significant growth as a result of future expansion and settlement
projects in the semiconductor industry in the Dresden area.
The pilot activities will address sector coupling especially in innovative heating networks
and the positive clean energy district, where local electricity production (e.g. PV) and
electricity-based heating technologies (e.g. central or decentralised heat pumps) are
cleverly combined. In order to be able to implement these new technologies, citizens have
to be informed and empowered in their decision-making process and be activated.

3.2.3. High-level assessment of progress in decarbonisation (max 5000
characters)
Please provide a high-level assessment of where the city is on the journey to
decarbonisation in this/these emissions domain(s).

The climate neutral transformation of the heat and energy supply on local level is one of
the key areas in the SECAPs of both cities. Supported by municipal heating plans
(currently under elaboration for Dresden and Leipzig) and additional local strategies (e.g.
Leipzig’s strategy on suitable locations for REEs production) Leipzig and Dresden are
creating the strategic foundations for local energy and heating transition.
Leipzig: As part of the overarching goal of carbon neutrality, municipal heating planning is
therefore of particular importance and, in this context, especially district heating: the dense
network and environmentally friendly production place it at the centre of the City of
Leipzig’s and Dresden’s municipal heating plan. In the future, the district heating network
is to take up a larger share of the city's energy mix and more buildings are to be connected
to the network, as district heating is environmentally friendly thanks to combined heat and
power generation and is considered highly efficient due to its excellent primary efficiency
factor. The city's heating plan aims to identify and record the potential for expanding the
district heating network and the need for alternative solutions in the neighbourhoods so
that comprehensive strategies for expanding the energy infrastructure can be developed.
EnAct4CleanCities can support these objectives by providing digital tools with which the
needs and potentials can be digitally mapped, and owners can be mobilised to implement
the district-specific projects of the municipal heating plan. The objectives of the municipal
heating plan clearly show the special need to intervene at the property owner level.
Property owners have a special duty to initiate the refurbishment of their property and
implement climate-friendly heating systems and energy sources in their buildings. The
EnAct4CleanCities tool kit will contribute to satisfy the demand for further consultation as
well as knowledge on and supporting funding schemes to ensure compliance with the
city’s carbon neutrality objectives.
From 2011 to 2019, Leipzig experienced a steady decline in emissions per capita across
all sectors after an initial increase. The overall reduction over nine years amounted to
17.1%, with the economic sector leading with a 24.4% decrease, followed by households
(12.9%) and transportation (7.3%). In 2019, emissions stood at 5.3 tons per capita, despite
a 16.3% population increase. In terms of energy consumption and emissions distributions,
households play a significant role, contributing to 28.2% of GHG emissions. However,
households represented 34.3% of total energy consumption compared to industry’s
24.5%, mainly due to differences in heating fuel mix and industrial electricity usage.
The breakdown by energy sources highlights fossil fuels, electricity, and gas as the

22

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
primary contributors, comprising nearly 77% of total energy consumption and around 83%
of GHG emissions. Gas had the highest consumption share (31.2%), while electricity
contributed over a third of the emissions (34.2%). The advantages of renewable energies
become evident in their lower emission factors.
Dresden: Dresden’s proposed reduction path in this domain is based on comprehensive,
high-resolution data analysis, especially in the area of energy supply for buildings.
Last year a specific building and system-specific potential investigation was carried out
and different scenarios considered and put forward. As a result, a concrete target path
was developed that is based on various potentials for reducing greenhouse gases.
Furthermore, first technical feasibility studies for cold district heating networks for specific
neighborhouds in Dresden have been carried out focusing on local conditions, technical
feasibility and REE potential. Based on these results, decisions will be taken in the coming
months on where these new networks will be able to be installed. To do so, the public
needs to be informed and taken on board of this whole transformation process. The pilot
activities will contribute to this process.

3.2.4. Barriers and challenges to be addressed via pilot activities (max 5000
characters)
Please describe what barriers /challenges you have identified to be addressed
via the pilot activities, in the concerned emissions domain(s).

The transition to local energy and heat system poses significant technical, financial, and
social challenges for Leipzig and Dresden, both historically reliant on coal and gas.
Despite aspirations for a sustainable shift, challenges like rising energy prices and
ensuring affordability for all households must be addressed. Successful transition requires
broad societal commitment.
Engaging stakeholders like property owners and energy suppliers is vital. However, the
transition pathway outlined in the cities’ heating and energy transition strategies go along
with massive changes in the urban infrastructure and have heavy impacts on property
owners and other stakeholder groups. Additionally, to the need to understand those
complex municipal strategies, revolving changes in the national regulations in the past two
years (see above) have created uncertainties among those stakeholder groups. Key
concerns include e.g. the obligation to update heating systems, the accessibility of
renewable energy sources (e.g. if a neighbourhood will be connected to district heating or
not), the resulting costs and also available financial support schemes.
EnAct4CleanCities aims to guide property owners towards meaningful engagement in
energy and heating transition. Crucial to this goal is knowledge acquisition – both property
owners and citizens must understand specific issues related to energy transition and
efficiency, available renewable sources, and sustainable practices as well as
understanding the status quo of the local energy transition.
Yet, the diverse landscape of property owners complicates communication and activation
efforts, and its heterogeneous organizational structures hinder uniform engagement
strategies. In homogeneous owner structures within district heating areas, it is usually

23

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
easier to approach and activate the owners as they are often uniformly organised in
housing associations or cooperatives. However, particular challenges arise especially in
neighbourhoods where decentralised heat supplies are required, for example through local
district heating. Leipzig has been developing so-called “energetic refurbishment concepts”
for different neighbourhoods since 2015 (supported by federal funding programs).
Followed by an “energetic refurbishment management”, the ambition was to motivate
private property owners to support them in energy transition and refurbishment processes.
Due to the heterogenous owner structures in many districts in Leipzig (which are also
common in Dresden), the impacts of the management on the property owners was limited
as the participation measures mainly focused on analogue formats, whereas property
owners are often not based in Leipzig or Dresden. Tailored approaches are therefore
necessary to reach the property owners.
EnAct4CleanCities will therefore explore the potentials of digital tools, esp. of the
knowledge hub to reach property owners in Leipzig but also those not based in the cities.
On the other hand, there is already a wide range of online information available for
property owners on suitable refurbishment buildings. Yet those information tools are not
linked a) to the municipal strategies regarding energy transition and their direct
implications on different neighbourhoods (e.g. which district will be served by district
heating in the future) and b) don’t guide interested homeowners towards suitable
consulting offers and funding programs. Together with the SAENA and
“Verbraucherzentrale”, EnAct4CleanCities will explore possibilities to inform, enable and
activate various stakeholder groups to actively take part in energy and heating transition
and connect and promote already existing knowledge repositories to create the
Knowledge hub as a “one-stop-shop” solution.
Thematic priorities include understanding municipal heat planning and energy transition,
exploring innovative renovation options, and identifying suitable funding opportunities.

3.2.5. Barriers and opportunity for systemic approach (max 5000 characters)
Please describe how you envisage addressing these particular barriers will
provide an opportunity for a systemic approach, and systemic change?
Global challenges such as achieving climate protection goals and digitalization must also
be addressed at the local level. Municipalities play a significant role as planning,
implementing, and accompanying institutions. Due to the complexity of these challenges,
they can no longer be tackled within the traditional governance structures, mainly
focussing on a silo or department-based approach. Instead, they require comprehensive,
co-creative collaboration across the boundaries of individual departments. The Cities of
Leipzig and Dresden have already identified this and reacted to those needs.
After the declaration of climate emergency in 2019 the City of Leipzig created the
Department for Sustainable Development and Climate Protection (RNK) as a managing
body for the SECAP within city administration. Additionally, several positions for so-called
“climate protection managers” where created in different departments (e.g. blue and green
infrastructure, urban planning, mobility) to ensure cross-silo cooperation. Together with the
Digital City Unit (RDS) the RNK is also forming the transition team for the EU Mission on
100 Climate Neutral and Smart Cities. Besides established day-to-day work flows,
cooperation in the different strategies regarding climate neutrality and energy transition
(e.g. SECAP, municipal heat planning), the City of Leipzig already used co-creation
approaches, e.g. for drafting a standard approach for climate neutral district development
within the HORIZON project SPARCS.
In Dresden cross-department work between the climate protection staff unit and the smart
city unit of the economic development agency as well as the strategy unit of the Mayor’s
office has been established on a regular basis since the participation in the EU-cities

24

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
Mission. Through the successful participation in Horizon mission calls, new staff can be
hired that will be integrated in the Dresden transition team (including the projects
NEUTRAL PATH, MOBILITIES4EU and U_CAN).
The pilot project partner STESAD is already an important urban development planning
company working for the city of Dresden in a huge number of local district and
infrastructure development projects. They will be able to build new capacities and gain
insights that will contribute to future district solution and transformation projects.
EnAct4CleanCities will build upon those existing cross-department working structures. On
the one hand, established formats, like weekly meetings of the climate protection
managers in Leipzig will be used to share (interim) results from the projects. This core
team will be involved in each of the development phases of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit
(e.g. co-creation workshops, testing of the prototypes regarding usability etc.). To go
beyond those departments already involved in climate protection and adaptation
processes, formats like “Digitalkomplizen” will be used to reach out to other departments
not yet involved. “Digitalkomplizen” is a biannual workshop format by the Digital City Unit
broadly inviting colleagues from all departments with an interest on Smart City and
digitalization topics to support networking and co-creation of new ideas and projects within
the municipality. The newly established Smart City Lab Leipzig also offers co-working
facilities to bring together colleagues from different departments depending on the
development phases of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit.
In Dresden regular working meetings of the climate protection staff unit with other cities
units will be used to share information gained from the EnAct4CleanCities project as well
as other information exchange formats such as the regular EU affairs roundtable. The City
of Dresden is also experimenting with new work formats and structures and has developed
a Co-Working lab as well that is currently tested by all the city departments.
The EnAct4CleanCities tool kit will also be valuable for other departments in the city. E.g.
the development and deployment of technical prerequisites in the Leipzig App to include
challenges to nudge climate friendly behaviour can later also be adapted and used in other
contexts, e.g. mobility or waste reduction.

3.3. Orienting to systemic solution(s)
3.3.1. Selecting the Levers of/for change your pilot activities will focus on
(IMPORTANT: Please select this in the Proposal Overview tab)
Please identify the relevant levers of/for change that your pilot activities will focus
on from the Proposal Overview tab
Please identify the relevant levers of/for change that your pilot activities will exploit, from the pick list
provided.
1. ☐ Technology / infrastructure
2. ☒ Social innovation
3. ☐ Finance and Funding
4. ☒ Governance and policy
5. ☒ Democracy and Participation
6. ☒ Learning and Capabilities
7. ☒ Data and Digitalisation
8. ☐ Procurement

3.3.2. Levers of/for change and important for carbon neutrality ambition (max
2500 characters)

25

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
Please outline the potential levers (of/for change) the pilot activities will focus on
and the importance of these to the city's carbon neutrality ambition.

EnAct4CleanCities aims to shape the local heating and energy transition with
suitable participation formats for relevant stakeholders and civil society in the
Mission cities Leipzig and Dresden. Therefore, in addition to technological
innovations, main levers EnAct4CleanCities will focus on are social
innovations in order to avoid an unsocial transition path, e.g. linked to
additional financial burdens for citizens. And as the heating and energy
markets are very complex, highly fragmented and characterised by many
players, decisions for these transitions often are accompanied by the different,
sometimes conflicting needs of owners, tenants and the housing industry. In
order to mediate between different interests, coordinate actions and leverage
potential, the pilot activities will ensure a democratic and participative
approach (e.g. on community or district/neighbourhood level), and Leipzig and
Dresden are endeavouring to develop solutions for suitable stakeholder
engagement and participation formats, starting at an early stage. To this end,
EnAct4Cities is developing a toolkit for participatory approaches for the
heating and energy transition processes that network local stakeholders,
enable information exchange and self-empowerment and involve all
stakeholders in decision-making processes. Thus, the envisaged capacities
and capabilities for EnAct4Cities represent fundamental solutions for a
successful, forward-looking and socially acceptable heating and energy
transition in both cities. This includes consultation capacities - face to face as
well as tools such as the online provision of information (knowledge hubs) and matching digital participation opportunities, fostered through nudging and
gamification approaches. These solutions are intended to help tap synergies
and learnings to develop project ideas - in the sense of co-creation – and
resolve conflicts and avoid planning errors at municipal level. To this end,
Leipzig and Dresden will develop governance models to establish a regional
and local dialogue and use this dialogue to sensitize and win over all local
stakeholders to the heating and energy transition and their goals and projects
within the framework of the mission and the CCC.
Learning from each other (Leipzig and Dresden) and from other municipalities
at state level (Saxony) and in Germany (STRONGER network of German
mission cities) in the sense of peer learning is already partly established and
shall be strengthened with EnAct4Cities.
3.3.3. Anticipated interaction of, and entry points for, identified leaver(s) (max
5000 characters)
Please describe how the identified lever(s) (of/for change) is/are anticipated to
interact (i.e. where and how, practically, the levers will be used in the two-year
programme), and the entry point(s) the pilot activities will target.

As mentioned above in sec. 3.3.2, EnAct4CleanCities will focus on social
innovations in order to strengthen and promote just heating and energy
transitions for their carbon-neutral Mission paths. The development of digital
engagement and participation strategies as social innovations will serve as a
framework for the entire duration of the project and help to avoid an unsocial

26

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
transition path, e.g. linked to additional financial burdens for citizens or
consequences like energy poverty.
To ensure the democratic and participative approach (e.g. on community or
district/neighbourhood level), Leipzig and Dresden are both aiming at highest
possible transparency for the stakeholder needs and to map those needs
against stakeholder constellation and governance models at an early pilot
project stage (WP2). Thus, the challenge of the conversion of the building
sector to a sustainable heat and energy supply will be addressed for society as
a whole, and gaps in the stakeholder engagement strategies for both cities
Leipzig and Dresden will be identified, e.g. in terms of hard-to-reach
property/homeowners or tenants. This improved overview and transparency of
and about stakeholder constellations will improve the subsequent development
of governance models to establish a regional and local dialogue.
In addition, if a broad possible participation rate is achieved, this can also be
used as momentum for further activities on both cities carbon-neutrality
transition paths and climate city contracts development, as this can promote
acceptance for the change needed and accelerate its implementation in a longterm perspective.
The stakeholder and needs analysis will enrich the development of suitable
stakeholder engagement and participation formats and the target-group
oriented provision of information (e.g. about technology options, or funding) on
the knowledge hubs in both cities. The strengthening of self-empowered and
informed decision-making will lead increased capacities and capabilities for
EnAct4Cities target groups. Therefore, synergies and learnings will be
fostered and collected along the whole development path (WP3 and 4) of the
pilot solutions. This will be accompanied by a learning strategy comprising
learning from each other (Leipzig and Dresden) as well as on a regional level
(Saxony) and in Germany (stronGER network of German mission cities)
throughout the whole pilot project lifetime (WP5). Finally, lessons learned and
success stories regarding the implementation of heating and/or energy
transition projects from both cities Leipzig and Dresden will be disseminated
(WP6) to inspire and motivate, as well as provide important information on
which steps to take and how challenges can be met, across regional, national
and EU-level from the second pilot project year on.

27

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

4. Capacity to Act
4.1. Collaboration and engagement
4.1.1. Stakeholders (max 2500 characters)
Please outline stakeholders that you intend to work with (and how you have, or
will, select them). Please include reasons why, their roles, timing, and how you
are going to work with them.
EnAct4CleanCities aims to develop a strong coalition of change within the urban society
and a common vision for a sustainable and climate-neutral city in one of the most difficult
emission sectors of cities, the energy and heating sector. As emissions in this sector
cannot be reduced directly through municipal action and, in the cases of Leipzig and
Dresden, the homeowners whose involvement is essential for change and heat transition
are often not local.
Besides the CCC transition teams in Leipzig and Dresden, EnAct4CleanCities will involve
additional stakeholders on local and state level (see 1.4). All of them are united by the fact
that they are also committed to climate-friendly action and to the achievement of carbon
neutrality and have already cooperated successfully with the cities of Leipzig and/or
Dresden in the past.
SAENA and the Saxony Consumer Advice Centre (Verbraucherzentrale) were selected as
partners to ensure that the EncAct4Clean City tool kit (esp. The Knowledge Hub) address
the intended target groups and that the best possible information and visibility is achieved.
SAENA specialises in disseminating energy policy content for whole state of Saxony and
due to its relevance to citizens via selected channels, the Verbraucherzentrale is an
important authority that mediates between higher institutions and the public. Thus, the
Verbraucherzentrale is a central point of contact for information and lends credibility to the
tools provided. As both organizations are active throughout the whole Free State of
Saxony, they are also valuable partners in sharing the experiences and learnings of the
EnAct4CleanCities project within the region or State respectively.
Furthermore, SMEKUL was selected as an important political actor to ensure both
compatibility with the Saxon climate and energy targets and transparency and
communication at political level. Finally, EEKN was selected to represent Leipzig's
municipal utilities to deepen and expand the partnership already existing from other
projects in the area of creating a digital energy map for the city of Leipzig.
Leibniz Institute (IöR) research program is dedicated to transformation processes that
shape sustainable and resilient regions, cities and neighbourhoods. With a focus on a built
sustainable environment that have also conducted citizen science projects in relation to
energy and climate data (https://colouring.dresden.ioer.info/).

4.1.2. Impact on citizens (max 2500 characters)
How do you envisage the pilot activities will ultimately be beneficial for citizens,
whether direct or indirect?
EnAct4CleanCities and the tool kit to be developed directly adresses citizens’s needs for
knowledge and transparency in the energy transition.
The EnAct4CleanCities Knowlege Hubs for property owners in both cities will provide
valuable information on the municipal strategy for energy and heat transition and their
direct impacts on different neighbourhoods to eliminate uncertainties. Directly connecting

28

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
property owners with concrete information on consultation and funding opportunities
suitable for their specific framework condition will offer less time-consuming research for
the target groups. But also the other tools of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit have a direct
impact for citizens: updating the Leipzig Energy Map and publishing energy transition
related data in an easy yet comprehensive way will also make the complex topic of the
energy transition easier to understand. Last but not least will the gamification and
application-based tools (e.g. Leipzig and Cleema app) help citizens to directly reflect on
their lifestyles.

4.1.3. Citizen participation (max 2500 characters)
Where do you plan to directly engage citizens in the activities (i.e. design and/or
implementation), if relevant/applicable? If not applicable/relevant, please explain
why.

Citizens are the main target group of the EnAct4CleanCities toolkit and are involved at
different development stages. This includes the usability assessment of the tool kit, which
will be checked when prototypes of the tools are presented to citizens, e.g. to local
stakeholder groups, such as Klimabündnis Leipzig or Forum Nachhaltiges Leipzig
(https://www.nachhaltiges-leipzig.de/) or during local climate action events (e.g. European
Mobility Week, Ökofete in Leipzig).
In Dresden the municipal heat planning is accompanied with a specific participation
process. In a first step so called Heat Transition Dialogues are organised that will start in
April 2024. All interested parties are invited to the public information event. Among other
things, the process of municipal heat planning, the results so far and the next steps are
presented. Afterwards, questions can be asked to the central contact persons for
municipal heat planning as part of a panel discussion. It is the start for further dialogues
that will also be used for the pilot activities.
(Beteiligung | Kommunaler Wärmeplan | Landeshauptstadt Dresden)
https://www.dresden.de/de/stadtraum/umwelt/umwelt/klima-undenergie/klimaschutz/kommunale-waermeplanung/beteiligung.php,
All tools will include possibilities to give feedback regarding their content and usability
which will feed in the further development of the tools and the exploitation concepts
(WP6). Citizen Science projects are used to encourage public engagement, for education
purposes but also to raise awareness for complicated and multi-layered topics like the
heating and energy transitions. As such the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit will include one
component (Data Collection Tool in Leipzig) to involve citizens by asking for
information/data (like concrete data but also photos, audio comments) from their everyday
life experiences, e.g. to create a digital city map on the topic of neighbourhood related
energy transition. Similar to the planned Climate Challenges, which will be published in the
Leipzig App and the Cleema App in Dresden as well as calls for citizen engagement,
citizens will be actively encouraged to participate in the project's activities.

4.1.4. Citizen engagement (max 2500 characters)

29

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
How will you engage citizens in the narrative and purpose of these climate
actions, to foster collective understanding?

A multi-year communication and participation process with civil society on climate
protection and neutrality is already in place in Leipzig and Dresden. E.g. the decisions of
the Leipzig city council on the climate emergency in 2019 were initiated by Fridays for
Future Leipzig and Dresden Zero initiated the council decisions on the climate neutrality
targets of the cities. EnAct4CleanCities can therefore built up on the existing awareness
and commitment of different stakeholder groups in civil society. Yet further activating and
communication are necessary to generate the overall commitment of the city's civil society
to climate neutrality. Therefore, communication and education campaigns to further raise
awareness this topic are also key measures of Leipzig’s and Dresden’s SECAPs. The
EnAct4cleanCities project will support those ongoing activities and add further
communication and engagement elements to them on one side. On the other side, the
existing groundwork of both cities in communication regarding climate protection and
neutrality provides the advantage of building upon established formats and cooperative
structures, into which the EnAct4CleanCities tools can be integrated, by using regular
events such as the Ökofete in Leipzig and involving with local initiatives.
The duration and spatial context of the tool applications varies while the
EntAct4CleanCities Knowledge Hub will be permanently available, activities surrounding
the Citizen Science project and challenges in the two apps in Leipzig and Dresden are
limited to certain time windows. This provides the opportunity to apply them temporarily
and spatially in different contexts. As such, the mapping of the existing heat supply and
envisaged future developments on district level raises awareness of the climate impact in
the residential sector and increases the potential for identification with the local need for
action among citizens. For instance, the Citizen Science project could be deployed within
a specific timeframe for one neighborhoud to gather location-specific information for local
strategies. Linked with neighbourhood specific information on the state of the energy
transition from Leipzig Energy map this provides the opportunity to make the overarching
and often abstract topic of the energy transition locally understandable. This is also
beneficial when talking to local decision-making bodies, such as district or neighbourhood
councils.

4.2. Cross-cutting considerations
4.2.1. Cross-cutting considerations (relate) (max 2500 characters)
In what way do your proposed pilot activities relate to issues and/or opportunities
of diversity, inclusion, gender dimension, accessibility, and/or a just transition?

Leipzig and Dresden see the goal of climate neutrality by 2030 not only as a technological
challenge, but also as a socio-ecological one. In this sense, EnAct4CleanCities considers
diversity, inclusion, gender, accessibility and a just inclusive transition as integral aspects
of its mission. The Digital City Unit Leipzig has already gained experience in the
development of accessible tools, e.g. in the development phase of Leipzig app, whereby
the greatest possible accessibility is always a top priority. This experience is already taken
into account during the technical conception stage of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit in
terms of the user interface and prototypes and will be evaluated during the test phase.
The addressed topics or GHG reduction sectors heating and energy transition are linked to
national acts like the GEG amendment (Act on Energy Conservation and the Use of
Renewable Energies for Heating and Cooling in Buildings) which must be accompanied at

30

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
city level with appropriate framework conditions for local implementation, in order to
support those - in particular in the heating transition - who cannot make the necessary
investments without help and to ensure socially acceptable implementation and
acceptance of the heating and energy transition.
Furthermore, not all members of the target groups are “digital natives”. Therefore, the use
of digital participation strategies and tools needs to be addressed by the accompanying
communication strategy in both cities and active engagement on the spot.
And while clean energy transitions can create benefits and opportunities for women,
women are also frequently more exposed to energy poverty, often due to lower levels of
disposable income and overrepresentation in single-parent households. As a result, they
are more exposed to the consequences of energy poverty, including health impacts and
social exclusion.
Finally, there are different attitudes among the population towards measures to combat
climate change, which are also influenced by the media discourse. The cities of Leipzig
and Dresden will have to mediate and moderate the heating and energy transition paths in
their missions and identify opportunities for responsible political and individual action in
dealing with these challenges for their citizens to justify and promote morally justifiable
options for action (also in their CCCs) and to thereby reduce uncertainties.

4.2.2. Cross-cutting considerations (approach) (max 2500 characters)
How will you approach and cater to these considerations and potential
impacts/effects (indirect or otherwise) during the implementation of pilot activities,
and ensure pilot activities align with the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH)
principle?
All pilot activities will comply with the ‘do no significant harm’ principle.
In addition to gender- and culturally sensitive language that makes complex content
understandable, theEnAct4CleanCities activities also take into account cross-cutting
issues such as representation and participation, access to and control over resources as
well as gender-specific mechanisms, routines and structures in order to address the
challenges described in 4.2.1.
These dimensions are not only important with regard to gender equality, but also to social
justice in general. The aim is to eliminate uncertainties and reach as many people as
possible, regardless of their professional involvement, social background, gender or age.
EnAct4CleanCities sees digital engagement strategies and the accessibility of digital tools
and as a core element to develop transparent and participatory planning and
implementation processes in the sense of a resilient and socially acceptable heating and
energy transition for both cities Leipzig and Dresden.
EnAct4CleanCities will develop mitigating measures linked to its risk register to avoid
unbalanced and unsocial impacts, e.g. for gender inequalities in access to energy
services, and therefore take a vulnerable groups’ lens when developing participation tools
and the knowledge hubs to prevent any risk of disproportionate or unintended
consequences for vulnerable groups. Therefore, EnAct4CleanCities will apply strong data
collection and monitoring methods to track the success of gender-inclusive energy
transition activities, enabling informed and targeted interventions at local levels.
In addition, a needs-based and socially balanced information basis for funding and
financing options will be ensured when developing the knowledge hubs for Leipzig and
Dresden to minimise cost risks, e.g. for tenants, and promote long-term, reliable, effective
and socially acceptable solutions for the heating and energy transitions.

31

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
In order not to limit the reach of the information provided to the digital audience and not to
exclude people who lack digital skills and experience in using mobile devices, the
proposed pilot activities will put great effort in providing barrier free access to the
developed and tested tools. However, as experiences with digital participation tools, e.g.
with the Mobi-O-Mat in Dresden, analogue measures in both Smart City Labs in Leipzig
and Dresden will accompany the communication and usage of these tools in
EnAct4CleanCities.

4.3. Capacity and capability
4.3.1. Coordination and management (max 5000 characters)
Please outline how the city intends to coordinate and manage the programme,
including relevant resource / deployment plans across the city administration,
and, where relevant, specific roles, profiles, and expertise.
The City of Leipzig, namely the Digital City Unit (RDS) will be the Lead partner of the
EnAct4CleanCities project. It consists of experts from the fields of architecture, social
sciences, engineering and IT to ensure a holistic approach to smart, sustainable urban
development and has built up extensive knowledge and capacities in project and financial
management. Established in 2019 the RDS has been leading and managing national and
EU-funded projects ever since. This includes not only consortia consisting different city
departments but also larger consortia with universities, public utilities, NGOs and other
businesses. Amongst others the Digital City Unit has been leading local consortia in the
EU Horizon projects Triangulum and SPARCS and international consortia e.g. INTERREG
project EfficienCE.
In the EnAct4CleanCities project the Digital City Units oversees both the overall project
management and the implementation of individual components of the EnAct4CleanCities
toolkit in Leipzig. It is anticipated that additional departments and offices will be involved in
the workflow as per the developmental stage of the toolkit.
For the City of Dresden, the climate protection unit will be the main coordinating unit. It will be
the main coordinator of activities and connect to the NZC platform but also contribute to
content and alignment to local heat planning. There will be a strong cooperation with the
economic development department and its smart city unit that is managing other mission call
projects (NEUTRALPATH, MOBILITIESEU) as well as with the urban strategy unit in the
mayor’s office that is centrally coordinating the implementation of the EU-Cities Mission.
A matrix structure is applied between the three different units, coming together in regular
meetings in order to exchange relevant information and providing update on projects and
process.
In addition to the city administration staff, the STESAD GmbH will be a strong actor in the
Dresden consortium. They will co-design processes and implement many of the envisioned
pilot activities. The STESAD is already involved in Dresden’s citizen information and
participation plan for the local heat transition and therefore a natural partner in this project.
It will provide furthermore insights on how the city will continue to fully commit its financial
resources to building up a more comprehensive energy information and advice hub or a
potential energy agency. Urban project development and co-designing as well as implementing
local participation strategies are important business areas of the STESAD.

Implementation of the EnAct4CleanCities project:
The inception of the project will be marked by the establishment and signing of a
Partnership Agreement along with a comprehensive Project, Quality, and Risk
Management Plan. This Partnership Agreement serves as a cornerstone document
governing internal project operations and quality assurance processes. Within its
framework, procedures for effective communication, progress tracking, risk mitigation, and
status reporting will be delineated. This agreement will serve as a point of reference for the

32

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
collaborative efforts among the three EnAct4cities partners: the City of Leipzig, the City of
Dresden, and STESAD.
The governance and management of the project consortium, as well as relevant
stakeholders, will be overseen by the EnAct4CleanCities board. Comprising key
departments from both cities (Leipzig: RDS, RNK; Dresden: Climate Protection Unit,
Urban Strategy Unit) and representatives from partner STESAD, the board's principal
objective is to ensure the attainment of project goals through the coordination of
collaborative efforts and seamless integration between work packages. Regular monthly
in-person meetings will be held to facilitate effective coordination and decision-making.
The Interim Report and Final Report will be composed of two main components: the
Technical Report and the Financial Report. The Technical Report will provide a detailed
account of the work undertaken by the project beneficiaries and the utilization of
resources. Meanwhile, the Financial Report will include individual financial statements
from each beneficiary, ensuring transparency and accountability in financial management
throughout the project duration.

4.3.2. Learning plan (max 5000 characters)
What approach will the city take to assess capability and capacity needs to
deliver the pilot activities and more broadly to support and capitalise on learning
and development for city / systems transformation.

Leipzig and Dresden leverage broad knowledge bases facilitated by established internal
governance structures for drafting the Climate City Contracts and proven implementation
of multi-year cooperative projects, easing the EnAct4CleanCities project's implementation.
As such, EnAct4CleanCities will e.g. build up on existing learnings from the (technical)
implementation of digital tools but also on methodologies for the assessment of the tools
(e.g. WP 4).
Both cities are aware of the benefits the projects like EnAct4CleanCities can offer
regarding establishing new knowledge and capacities. In the drafting of the
EnAct4CleanCities proposal the cities have already identified relevant stakeholders
internally (see 1.3) and externally (see 1.4) that should be involved in the implementation
of the pilot. During the development of the EnAct4CleanCities it will be assessed which
additional stakeholders should be involved, e.g. during the stakeholder mapping or the
drafting of the EnAct4CleanCities toolkit concept (WP2+3). Through regular internal
exchanges with other city departments (see 3.2.5) additional needs will be identified and
discussed in the City2city exchange between Dresden and Leipzig (see 2.2.3). The
monthly exchange allows to react on additional needs both in persons but also knowledge
on a short-term basis and is necessary for the agile development of the EnAct4CleanCities
toolkit.
Thus, both cities will promote a culture of continuous improvement by regularly reviewing
and refining their approach to capacity building and learning.
From previous projects and processes it became clear that leveraging learning and growth
opportunities for broader transformational goals cannot solely rely on the documentation,
i.e., written records, of project outcomes. Instead, it should involve active engagement and
participation from stakeholders, ongoing dialogue and reflection, practical application of
lessons learned, and institutionalization of knowledge within the organizational culture.
Therefore, interim results and learnings of EnAct4CleanCities will be shared and
discussed with different stakeholders inside and outside the core team. E.g. the Digital
City Unit in Leipzig has found success in sharing and discussing project outcomes with
teams from other projects during monthly meetings. Yet simple things like a joint working
environment, e.g. the co-working facilities in the Smart City Lab Leipzig and similar offers
in Dresden, ease up cross-project exchange and learnings (the co-working facilities are
also open for the partners of the other cities and from the stakeholders).

33

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

Besides the city internal and City2City Learning between Leipzig and Dresden and s
described in more detail in 2.2.3, there will be an exchange with other Saxon cities at
regional level through cooperation with the Saxon Energy Agency (SAENA) and the Saxon
Ministry for Energy, Climate and the Environment (SMEKUL). Since 2022 the biweekly
exchange with the network of German Mission Cities stronGERcities as already supported
the CCC processes in all cities and has developed to an important networking and
consultation facility for all participating cities. The sharing of insights from the pilot city
projects (e.g. CoLab by the cities of Mannheim, Aachen and Münster) are an essential part
of the intercity-learning process. The EnAct4Cleancities team will also contribute with
learning from this project to this.
On international level the EnAct4CleanCities learning process is complemented by the
Twin-City Programme by NZC with tailored mentoring visits to the partner cities and study
visits to the partner cities in Leipzig and Dresden based on the identified learning needs.
Furthermore, both cities are full (Dresden) or network partners (Leipzig) to the U_CAN
project, envisions integrating Ukrainian cities into the European Green Deal's (EGD) and
will contribute with EnAct4CleanCities results to the project.
.

4.4. Soundness of work plan
4.4.1. Please confirm that you have completed the Work Plan section of this
application form/platform
☒ Confirmed

4.4.2. Budget: Please confirm you have uploaded your budget (Excel template)
into the Files section in this application form/platform
Please follow instructions on how/where to upload the Budget template in the
Files section
☐ Confirmed
4.4.3. Financial plan for implementing the pilot (in budget and over the two-year
grant timeframe) (max 5000 characters)
Please outline how you will ensure the implementation of the pilot activities in
budget and to the two-year grant timeframe. This refers to ensuring the financial
viability of the activities, and a plan for monitoring and adjusting implementation
over the course of the grant period. If/where the pilot activities described
constitute a part or parts of a larger city project/intervention, please outline how
will you finance the activities that are beyond the scope of those included in this
proposal, upon which the latter are dependent.
The implementation of the EnAct4CleanCities pilot will be ensured through a strict project
management and precise tasks and planned deliverables.
To ensure the implementation of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit within budget and within
the two-year grant timeframe, a meticulous approach will be adopted. Financial viability
will be ensured through careful planning, monitoring, and adjustments throughout the grant
period.
Initially, a detailed budget plan will be developed for each city, taking into account all
anticipated expenses associated with the pilot activities. Regular monitoring of expenditure

34

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
against the budget will be conducted to track financial performance and identify any
deviations.
To maintain alignment with the EnAct4CleanCities workplan, a project timeline for different
components of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit in each city will be established, outlining key
milestones and deadlines for each phase of the pilot activities. Progress will be closely
monitored against this timeline in the monthly meetings of the EnAct4CleanCities board,
with adjustments made as necessary to ensure timely completion.
The EnAct4CleanCities pilot is not part of any larger city project or intervention. Yet both
cities explore alternative funding sources in order to secure long-term financing and further
development of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit, e.g. national and MISSION and NEB calls
for this purpose.

35

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

5. Impact
5.1. Pilot activities' (learning/reflexive) governance
5.1.1. Reflexive governance (model) (max 5000 characters)
Please describe the governance model for the pilot activities, including who is
expected to participate and how, and how the model will ensure accountability,
transparency, and diversity of participants.

The EnAct4CleanCities project management will be carried out on several levels
based on the division of responsibilities for individual outputs, activities, and their
continuous implementation. As already explained in 3.2.3 (internal working structures)
and 2.2.3 (involved external stakeholders) the EnAct4CleanCities project builds upon a
strong expertise of internal and external experts. Building up on the commitments of the
partners (partnership agreements and letter of support) the governance model for the
EnAct4CleanCities pilot activities will be designed to promote accountability, transparency,
and diversity of participants, ensuring effective decision-making and stakeholder
engagement throughout the process.
The governance model will incorporate the following mechanisms to promote
accountability, transparency, and diversity:
Clear Roles and Responsibilities: Each EnAct4CleanCities stakeholder group will have
defined roles and responsibilities, ensuring clarity and accountability in decision-making
and implementation (laid out in the partnership agreement and letter of support).
Monthly meetings of the EnAct4CleanCities board (see 4.3.1) will promote transparency
and accountability and is supplemented by day-to-day communication between the cities
to keep stakeholders informed of progress, challenges, and decisions related to the pilot
activities. In the monthly progress meetings EnAct4CleanCities partners discuss project
progress, milestones and risk management issues.

5.1.2. Governance for learning (max 5000 characters)
Please outline how the proposed governance model includes feedback and
iterative learning processes (i.e. Sensemaking), to inform the development of the
pilot activities and their intended implementation and impact.

As outlined in 4.3.2 learning processes in the EnAct4CleanCities projects will be ensured
on various levels (city-internal, city-2-city between Leipzig and Dresden, between the
EnAct4CleanCities cites and saxon cities, within the German Mission cities network
stronGERcities and on international level within the NZC Twin city program).
WP5 outlines the process on replicating and transferring knowledge gained from different
development phases of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit to the different levels. It addresses
the learnings on different regional, national and international governance levels. It involves
documenting lessons learned, facilitating knowledge transfer, and fostering a culture of
learning. Through sense-making activities, insights are synthesised and disseminated to
enable effective replication of successful EnAct4CleanCities strategies and continuous
improvement across the organisation or project. This will include exchange via
documented knowledge (e.g. WP4.3 EnAct4CleanCities Assessment Framework or WP6

36

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
EnAct4CleanCities Playbook "Enabling and activating for a clean and inclusive energy
transition") but also joint workshops and on-site visits.
Amongst others learning on Saxon level will be supported by the regional Energy Agency
of Saxony (SAENA). They will bring in their own experiences and the pilot project
experiences and organise the knowledge transfer in various workshops throughout the
region. WP5 will also build on existing replication strategies by climate neutrality-oriented
projects (e.g. SPARCS, NEUTRALPATH) and in connection with other MISSION projects
(U_CAN, MOBILITIESEU).

5.2. Pilot activities' outcomes and direct/indirect impact
5.2.1. Confirm that you have uploaded your MEL and Impact Framework template
Please confirm that you have completed the upload of your MEL and Impact
Framework
☒ Confirmed

5.3. Pilot activities' scalability, replication, and risk management
5.3.1. Pilot activities and impact scalability (max 2500 characters)
How can the pilot activities be expanded? And what is the potential impact (upon
emissions), at scale and over time?

The impact and replication potential of the tested solutions of the EnAct4CleanCities tool
kit will be analysed in detail in the individual exploitation concepts of both cities (WP6).
They will include governance and financial aspects as well as potential of impact,
supporting upscale and uptake of the achieved results and connect with longer range
solutions both spatially and temporally.
In general, the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit offers scalability on two levels: First, the content
created for the EnAct4CleanCities knowledge Hub can be used for other communication
and activating strategies for property owners also by other stakeholders like SAENA or
Verbraucherzentrale. Furthermore, the updated and displayed data of the Leipzig Energy
Map can be used as data base for other digital tools.
Second, the developed technical features (e.g. Knowledge Hub, technical components of
integrating challenges into Leipzig or Cleema App, the Citizen Science tool) can be reused
for other purposes or topics to involve stakeholders, e.g. for challenges addressing mobility
behaviour.
If the tool kit is well received, additional deployment on city-wide scale e.g. through the
public based energy agency in Dresden will be explored. The experience and networks of
the partners will be used to amplify the outreach of the results of the project, lessons
learned, and policy recommendations to support the deployment of the EnAct4CleanCities
project.
It is assumed that the establishment/development of interoperable, scalable digital
innovative solutions can be replicated across the Mission’s cities. EnAct4CleanCities will
show how affected groups take up the provided information and tools and how it can lead
to concrete change.
The project communication strategy (WP6) will in addition contribute to the efforts be
aimed at i) raising visibility and reference to EU funding, ii) communicating results in a

37

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)
clear, transparent, inclusive way; iii) maximising outreach through contents distribution via
both the project channels and external multipliers and engagement with the media
representing a major gateway to increase public awareness on the project.

5.3.2. Risks Management: Please confirm that you have completed the Risks
section of this application/submission platform.
☒ Confirmed

5.3.3. Learning for transferability and/or replication (max 2500 characters)
How do you intend to approach both capturing and disseminating learning with a
view to supporting transferability and/or replication across EU cities?

Learnings from the EnAct4CleanCities project will already be collected in the regular
meetings of the two cities (e.g. in WP 2 after stakeholder mapping or catalogue of
requirements) and documented in WP 4 with the EnAct4CleanCities Assessment
Framework, incl. a report on the usability, acceptance, and transferability of the tool
kit.
To disseminate those project results beyond local level the EnAct4CleanCities
playbook "Enabling and activating for a clean and inclusive energy transition" (WP6)
will be published. It provides a clear set of identified solutions that have been
developed and tested within the EnAct4CleanCities project. It will include
recommendations and Do's and Don'ts on how to develop and integrate digital tools
for enabling and activating stakeholders in local heating and energy transition
processes. It will detail the concrete learnings of EnAct4CleanCities on how to link
stakeholder engagement with governance mechanisms in the city administration.
Furthermore, activities and findings of EnAct4CleanCities will be integrated in the
ongoing communication activities of Leipzig and Dresden, e.g. in local campaigns for
climate friendly behaviour and closely linked to the process of the Climate City
Contracts. This includes dissemination to annual events like European Energy/Mobility
Week or specific local events related to climate topics such as Ökofete and Klimafair
in Leipzig. Dissemination measures will also include appearances on the cities’
websites among others. The EnAct4CleanCities tool kit will also be presented in an
exhibition in both Smart City Labs Leipzig and Dresden towards the end of the project.
As part of the Twin City Programme of NZC, EnAct4CleanCities organises tailored
mentoring visits to twin cities and hosts twin cities for study/shadow visits based on
identified needs for experience sharing and learning. EnAct4CleanCities contributes to
the knowledge repository of the NZC mission platform as well as NZC events (e.g.
annual conference, Summer School) as well as participation in other national and EU
conferences, e.g. in the Smart City context.

38

Call Template NZC Pilot Cities, Cohort 3 (2024)

6. Declarations and key word tags
6.1. Alignment to NZC Pilot Cities Programme eligible activities
Declaration of pilot activities alignment to the Pilot Cities Programme Call's eligible
activities.
☒Yes, applicant declares.

6.2. City Learning Programme
Declaration of participation in the City Learning Programme (Twin cities)
☒ Yes, applicant declares.

6.3. Other EU funded programmes/calls
I hereby declare that funding requested through this NZC Pilot Cities programme
application does not result in the double-funding of existing, EU funded activities.
☒ Yes, applicant declares.

6.4. Other EU funded programmes/Calls (max 5000 characters)
Please identify any other EU funded programmes/Calls you either have or intend to
apply to in the area of the outlined pilot activities as stated here (similar proposal).
Please specify any overlaps and complementarities as these may become important in
the definition and finalisation of any future grant agreement.

Both cities are currently not involved in any EU funded proposals or calls in the area of the
outlined pilot activities. However, in order to secure long-term financing and further
development of the EnAct4CleanCities tool kit both cities will continuously evaluate
MISSION and NEB calls for this purpose.

6.5. Key word tags
Please enter up to five key words / short phrases (try to keep to max 2-3 words, if not 1)
that summarise the intention and ambition of your pilot activities, in the following short
text fields.

1. Key Word Tag 1: stakeholder activation
2. Key Word Tag 2: energy and heat transition
3. Key Word Tag 3: innovative digital tools
4. Key Word Tag 4: enabling property owners
5. Key Word Tag 5: Matching information needs

39

