TREELINE
Introduction
1 BOLD VISION
A 2500 MILE JOURNEY
20 CONCERTS
10 COUNTRIES
1 0 0 0 PA R T I C I PA N T S
2 4 , 0 0 0 D I G I TA L A U D I E N C E
7,500 LIVE AUDIENCE

Treeline is a unique cross-European project mixing music and ecology with
communities, focusing on trees and old growth forests and supported by UNESCO. It
connects people with nature, and cross border communities with each other.
Devised by internationally renowned composer Graham Fitkin, Treeline comprises a
2500 mile journey through 10 countries from Romania to the UK, with concerts at 20
locations of a new musical work using recordings from speci c trees. It highlights our
dwindling old growth forests, their importance, biodiversity and heritage, and
encourages respect for these important protected areas on which we all depend.

fi

And Graham will be cycling the entire route…

Forests

Biodiversity

Creativity

Connecting Communities to their Environment

What is happening?
In 2025 our Creative Partners through Europe
choose a local tree, of importance to them. A
‘pro le’ is made of the tree and its surroundings
(including drawings, poems, dimensions and
recordings from the inside of the tree!). This data is
sent to Graham. He composes a new work using this
information. Then in 2026 he will undertake this huge
journey performing the new work at venues through
Europe in the towns and cities of those very trees,
working with the communities at each place.

Who is involved?

Creative Partners. Organisations engage with
a local group (children, students, bookclub,
music club, staff, volunteers etc) to organise
their participation. They also organise a venue
for the nal concert in their area.
Funding Partners. Trusts, companies and
individuals who support the idea and would
love to partner this not-for proft endeavour.
Graham and his team. Working hard to make this
the very best experience for all involved.

The Legacy

fi

fi

This is important work. It brings people together,
addresses issues like climate change, produces new
creative work and highlights the important role of trees
& forests. The project will garner extensive PR and
publicity. A new album of the music will be released in
2026 naming all the partners. A lasting network of European
partners will result and an interactive website, produced
with R3GIS, includes a lasting Tree Atlas of all the trees.
And then…the project will continue.

Next summer 2026 Graham’s concerts begin in Bucharest, Romania, before cycling and performing 20
concerts in Hungary, Slovakia, Poland, Czechia, Germany, Netherlands, Belgium, France and UK. He
will perform on piano, with tree sounds & newly created forest instruments from the piano keyboard.

Creative Partners
The role of each Creative Partner depends entirely on capabilities, size and time. We are making this
exible for partners so that they feel comfortable with their participation. Yes, we want to include as
many participants in the project as possible but we understand that might not always be possible.
Basic activities involved 1.

Identifying a local group/community who might like to be involved. This could be a student group,
bookclub, festival volunteers, staff, gardeners, cyclists, it is your choice. It could be 5 people or 105!

2. Liaise with the group to choose a tree and organise an afternoon session ‘pro ling’ the tree.
3. In 2026 put on the concert in a suitable venue with a piano and a PA.
We are very open to suggestions and lateral thinking from each Creative Partner so please do ask.
There could be tree planting, cycling a little way with Graham, engaging a local tree expert to educate
participants, a talk or lecture from Graham to the participants etc.
We expect this project to

be promoted throughout Europe with signi cant PR and marketing.

Therefore we hope that each Creative Partner bene ts from the increased pro le they will receive, and
the cross- Europe connections that will result.
The costs are minimal. We have funding to cover project organisation, commissioning of the music and
composer fees. There will be no administration or travel costs. The only thing we ask is a contribution

fi

fi

fi

for the E.1188 concert fee and accommodation for the nights either side of the concert.

fi

fl

The Journey

A Little About Graham
Graham Fitkin is an internationally renowned British composer working with institutions such
as the Royal Opera House, New York City Ballet, Southbank Centre, RLPO, The Hallé, the Tate
Galleries, Tokyo Symphony Orchestra and the BBC Symphony Orchestras.
Graham has won three BASCA Composer Awards and the Royal Philharmonic Society
Composer Award. He has also won the International Grand Prix Music for Dance Award.
His music has been recorded by Sony, Decca, Factory Records, Naxos, Bis, NMC, Signum and
many more.
He has been commissioned by the BBC Proms, Bridgewater Hall, the Natural History Museum,
2012 Cultural Olympiad, Royal Ballet, Ars Musica and Glastonbury and by performers such as
Yo-Yo Ma, Kathryn Stott, Loeki Stardust, Ensemble Bash, Athens Camerata, The Schubert
Ensemble and London Chamber Orchestra.
fitkin.com

Contact
Ruth Wall
production
Rowan McLeod production
Graham Fitkin creative work

ruth@fitkin.com
rowan@fitkin.com
graham@fitkin.com

Jane Ward

wardmusicjane@gmail.com

management

Once upon a time, ancient forests flourished undisturbed across the European continent.
Before countries, before borders, before humans, they connected in one long continuous
expanse.
From the towering trees of Romania to the untamed wilds of Poland, an ancient beech forest
formed an interconnected living chronicle of the past.
However, all but the smallest remnants of European primeval forests have disappeared.
Ancient, near-natural forests have become very rare these days, and so have the unique
ecosystems that live within them.
Treeline, a new and ambitious project, will be an extraordinary quest that links the UNESCO
protected ancient forests in Europe once again, connected by an epic cycling adventure
through 10 countries, aiming to celebrate the enduring spirit of these forests, fostering a
deeper connection between people and the ancient natural world that surrounds them.
Treeline will inspire a transformative legacy for forest conservation and cultural connection
across Europe. Once the cycling comes to an end, the project could become a catalyst for
raising awareness about re-wilding efforts, advocating for the preservation and restoration of
ancient woodland habitats.
In a post-Brexit world, by fostering collaborations between art, ecology, and local
communities, Treeline will be a platform for dialogue, creativity and action - one that
strengthens bonds between people and nature and ensures that Europe's ancient forests
remain vibrant for future generations.

“Trees are special living things. They can grow to huge heights, they regularly live for hundreds of
years. Most interestingly they connect and communicate with each other, often through
mycorrhizal networks, sharing nutrients, water and even, bizarrely to us, caring for each other.
At a time when 'longevity' is a concept we struggle to identify with I think it pertinent to celebrate
the humble but extraordinary tree, giving it centre stage within a musical art-work. This project
creates a new mycorrhizal- like network, regardless of national borders, by joining communities
and trees in a metaphorical line, running approximately 2500 miles, showing music and ecology
working together as catalysts for positive change, and leaving an interesting and important
legacy.”
Graham Fitkin

TREELINE

